Schroedinger's equation is going to allow us to solve many important problems in quantum
mechanics. Before doing that, we should think some more about how wave functions and particles
all work. A classic thought experiment that exposes some of the subtleties of quantum
mechanics is called the two slit diffraction experiment. This is based on a well-known
and quite remarkable experiment in optics, indeed, a key experiment that actually clarified
the wave behavior of light.
The experiment in optics is known as Young's slits, after Thomas Young performed it in
the very early 1800s. So we will start here by looking at Young's slits as just a classical
experiment with waves before we go on to look at surprising consequences for the way we're
going to look at quantum mechanics. The idea with Young's slits is that we have some mask,
and we've cut some slits in this mask.
And these slits are a distance s apart. And then what we do is we shine a wave, which
you can think of as a plane wave, onto this mask from the left hand side here. So we've
got light coming into these slits. The question really is, what's coming out of the other
side of these slits? And in particular, if we go to a screen at a very large here-- so
some very large distance, z0-- what are we going to see on the surface of this screen?
So we need to figure that out. So what we do is we use our Huygens-like construction.
And we consider each of these slits as point sources, giving us circularly expanding waves.
And the result of that will be some interference pattern over on the screen, which I've shown
by this bar here showing dark and bright and dark and bright and dark and bright regions
corresponding to the bright dark, bright dark regions of this interference pattern that
we get.
So as I said, just two circurlarly expanding waves here coming out of point sources that
we regard as having been generated as effective sources by this plane wave that's shown on
the left hand side of the slits. Now, let's look at the details of this a little bit,
because we're going to be able to figure something quite explicit out here. We look at some distances.
So these slits were a distance s apart. So from some center line here, we've got a distance
s/2 to this slit. We have our distance, z0, of course, we said was the distance between
the mask here and the screen. And specifically, let's look at some point x on the screen,
this point x up here. And note that this distance from the slit up to the point x will be x
minus s/2.
So this x minus that will be this height here. Now, we can use Pythagoras's theory to calculate
the distance from this upper source here, this upper slit, to the point x. It's simply
we take the square of this distance, we take the square of this, we add them together,
and we take the square root. And that gives us the length of this line here, that distance.
So we can do some algebra on that. We can take this expression inside the square root
here. We can flip it around. We can out the z0 squared from inside the square root and
take it out as a z0 outside the square root. So this used to be z0 squared here, with this
z0 squared. But we've taken that z0 squared out, which becomes a z0 outside the square
root.
And similarly, with this term here, we have to divide that by z0 squared. So now, we've
got something that is z0 times a square root of 1 plus something. And we're going to be
presuming that this distance x minus s over 2 is small compared to this distance here.
That's an assumption of our model.
We're saying this screen is a very long way away. Well, because of that, we can do a power
series expansion of the square root. And 1 plus small quantity with the square root taken
of that is approximately 1 plus 1/2 of that small quantity. So the square root of 1 plus
delta, if you like, is approximately 1 plus delta over 2.
So doing that, using this power series expansion of the square root, because this thing here
is a small number, we get what we have down here. It was one plus half of this all multiplied
by z0. So that's z0 plus this over 2z0, instead of z0 squared here. And we can multiply this
out here, and what we get is a set of terms, these ones here, we're going to group them
later on.
The important term we care about is this one here, minus sx over 2z0. Similarly, we can
look at the distance from the lower slit to the same point x. And obviously, this vertical
height here is now x plus s over 2. The horizontal distance is still z0.
So the distance from the lower source to the point x on the screen is the square root of
this distance squared plus this distance squared. That's our square root here. And we can do
a little algebra on that, the same kind of algebra as we did before. Doing our power
series expansion of this square root and rearranging terms, we get the same as we got before with
all this stuff as the same as we got before for the upper slit. But now, we have plus
sx over 2z0.
For the upper slit, we had a minus sign there. So let's look at the waves that we're going
to get on this simple calculation. We will presume for simplicity that at the screen,
the waves from the different sources are approximately equally bright. The screen is a very long
distance away, compared to the separation of the sources. So we just presume that the
waves from both of those are going to be equally bright.
And so using exponential waves for convenience here, they're easier to work with, our wave
on the screen is going to be proportional to the sum of two waves, one from the upper
slit and one from the lower slit. And you see here the distances that we had on our
diagram. So we can use our approximate formulas for the distances that we worked out before.
And here is our plus sx over 2z0 that came from the lower slit. And here's our minus
sx over 2z0 that came from the upper slit. And we have lumped all the rest of the terms
in our distances into an exponential factor at the front here. And this alpha we have
in here is k times all of the other terms that we had in both of our expressions for
the distances. So we just separated that out as a factor at the front here.
Now, we remember that e to the i theta plus e to the minus i theta is just 2 cos theta.
So this expression that we had here from the previous slide, we can rewrite in the following
form. And if we want, I can write that back in terms of lambdas here instead of k's, if
you like-- and no difference. It's just the same expression but with lambda instead of
k.
So the intensity of the beam, which, even with classical waves-- when we use exponential
waves, we think of as the modulus squared of the wave itself, that's going to be proportional
to cos squared of this over here, the e to the i alpha times e to the minus i alpha,
we'll just give as 1, so we can drop that anyway.
So as I said, the intensity is proportional to cos squared. Or if we like, we can write
out cos squared in terms of a half of 1 plus cos of twice the angle of interest. So this
is the interference pattern that we see on the screen, the brightness that we see on
the screen. So we have our interference fringes here. They're spaced by some amount, ds.
And in our algebra that we just did, because of that cos term that we had in here, the
separation of these interference fringes, we now have a formula for it. So we got that
formula from our cosine expression, that the interference fringes are going to repeat with
this distance here. So in the classic Young slits experiment in optics, this enables us
to measure the wavelength.
It's a very clever idea, because we can measure these fringe separations here as quite microscopic
distances. This is a long way away from these slits. In a real experiment, we'd make this
distance much larger, and this screen would be much larger. So we can measure these distances,
the interference fringe separations here, as quite microscopic distances. And as long
as we have a way of deducing just how far apart these slits are by looking carefully
at them, we can measure quite small wavelengths, even with all of these distances being quite
large.
That's the real trick of Young's slits experiments in optics. It enables you to measure the optical
wavelength without ever having anything whose size scale is the optical wavelength. And
that would have been very difficult in the early 1800s. So it's a very cute experiment
in optics. However, our interest in this is not so much the scale here, although we could
certainly use this size scale to measure electron wavelengths if we're sending electron waves
in here.
Our interest in this is a bit more fundamental in terms of interpreting what's going on.