Now we remember de Broglie's hypothesis. The electron has a wavelength, lambda, that is
given by Planck's constant divided by the momentum. And we wrote down the value of Planck's
constant here. This is as many decimal places as it's known to with any accuracy. Often
for calculations we'll just use 6.626 times 10 to minus 34.
Now what we want to do is use de Broglie's hypothesis to help us construct a wave equation.
So let's do that. And what we're going to do is we're going to construct a Helmholtz
wave equation here. So we're going to consider waves of only one wavelength for the moment,
a wavelength lambda. That is, monochromatic waves.
And with our Helmholtz wave equation, here's a Helmholtz wave equation that we might choose
to write down, where we've got k equals 2 pi over lambda. And we know this works for
simple waves and we're hoping it's going to work for quantum mechanical waves here. And
it's got solutions like sin kz, cos kz, e to the ikz or the same things with minus signs.
All of those are solutions of this equation, at least until we put some boundary conditions
in.
So in three dimensions, we know we generalize this as del squared psi equals minus k squared
psi. So again, we're postulating that we think we can construct a Helmholtz wave equation
here that may work for us. And again, this one has solutions similarly, sine k dot r,
cos k dot r, e to the ik dot r. And we checked that out before. And also with the minus signs
in front, these are all solutions. And of course k and r here are vectors. But this
is a simple three dimensional version of a Helmholtz equation.
So we take our de Broglie hypothesis, our definition that k is equal to 2 pi over lambda.
We're going to use k's instead of lambda's mostly. Then k is equal to 2 pi times the
momentum over h or k is equal to p over h bar. In fact, often you will get used to thinking
of h bar k as being the momentum. So that would be taking h bar over to here. Anyway,
this is our definition of k here. And h bar, as we've said before, is h over 2 pi. It's
a convenient unit to use often.
So with all of this, k squared is equal to p squared over h bar squared. Hence, using
de Broglie's hypothesis and choosing to write things in terms of k's instead of lambdas,
we have our proposed Helmholtz equation is del squared psi equals minus p squared over
h bar squared psi. Or equivalently we can take the h bar squared and the minus sign
over to this side, minus h bar squared del squared psi equals p squared psi. We're just
postulating this, remember.
If we were thinking explicitly of an electron, we can divide both sides of this equation
by the mass m 0 of the electron. Nobody can stop us from doing that. It's mathematically
perfectly legal. So then we have minus h bar squared over 2m 0 del squared psi equals p
squared over 2m 0 psi.
Now, we know from classical mechanics that this p squared over 2m 0 is classically just
a kinetic energy, in this case, of an electron, of a particle with mass m 0. And in general,
we know from classical mechanics and we hope it's going to work here in quantum mechanics
as well, that total energy, which we could call E, is just a kinetic energy plus the
potential energy. And we'll call the potential energy V of r.
So kinetic energy is total energy minus potential energy, obviously. Hence, our Helmholtz equation
that we had been working on before would become what we're now going to call the Schroedinger
equation. Substituting in for p squared over 2m 0 with E minus V of r, we get this equation
here-- that's the substitution on the right-- or equivalently this equation here. It's the
same equation.
This is perhaps a more common form of writing it, but both of these are used. This is the
Schroedinger equation. We've just postulated this, remember. We said let's take de Broglie's
hypothesis and let's see what happens if we try to construct a Helmholtz wave equation
using that for a monochromatic wave. And this is our result, and this is in fact Schroedinger's
equation.
This is technically what's called a time independent equation. And we can go on if we want, we
did this, presuming we were working with an electron just for definiteness, but we can
postulate that we could have a Schroedinger equation for any particle of mass m. So we'd
have instead of m 0 here we'd have just a mass of a particle. And this would be our
time independent Schroedinger equation for that particle. As I said, formally this is
the time independent Schroedinger equation. We'll look at the time dependent Schroedinger
equation later on.
Note that we've not derived Schroedinger's equation. We've merely suggested it as an
equation, one that agrees with at least one experiment. It's important to understand there's
no way to derive Schroedinger's equation from first principles. There are no first principles
in the physics that precedes quantum mechanics that predicts anything like such wave behavior
for the electron. Schroedinger's equation just has to be postulated, just like Newton
originally postulated his laws of motion. And the only justification for making such
a postulate is that it works.
Now that we have a wave equation, it might seem we are almost back into a classical world.
After all, sound waves, water waves, electromagnetic waves, and possibly many other kinds of waves
have straightforward classical meanings, meanings in terms of amplitudes of some quite real
physical quantities that we can measure. For sound waves, it would be air pressure. For
water waves, it would be the height of the surface of the water. For electromagnetic
waves, it might be the electric field strength and so on.
The interpretation of our quantum mechanical wave is, however, not apparently so direct.
Indeed, it's not even clear if we can measure this wave itself. And consequently, it's really
not directly clear what its meaning might be. This was a puzzle for the early workers
in quantum mechanics. And to be honest, it remains somewhat of a puzzle to this day.
In 1926, Max Born came up with an idea that has, however, turned out to work very well
empirically. Indeed, this is our main tool in deducing measurable quantities from quantum
mechanical calculations. He postulated that the modulus square of the wave function, at
some point, was proportional to the probability of finding the particle, an electron, for
example, near that point. Now, this is a purely probabilistic interpretation of quantum mechanics.
That bothered people then and it still bothers them today.
In particular, Einstein did not like it. And he made a statement in objection to it that
is much quoted in a paraphrased form as, "God does not play dice." What he means by that
is, perhaps, even that if we only currently have a probabilistic interpretation, maybe
underneath there is some real deterministic definite theory. And we're only seeing sort
of a statistical reflection of that underlying theory.
Now, there's a precedent for that in ordinary classical physics. We see pressures and temperatures
and those are reflections of the underlying, in the classical view, presumably definite
positions and momentums of atoms and molecules. That's merely a statistical view that we are
seeing. So the temperature in a gas is merely a statistical reflection of an underlying
theory that is, in fact, much more determinate based on actual positions in momentum of gas
atoms or molecules.
Now whether Einstein's wish for this more determinant underlying theory will come true
is still an open question. And in fact, the current predominant view is more towards the
probabilistic interpretation maybe being as good as we can get. Whatever the philosophical
questions here, the good news is that, as far as we are aware, this probabilistic interpretation
does indeed give us an empirical interpretation that works. And indeed, it works very well.
So let's look at Born's proposal.
Specifically then, Born's postulate is that the probability P of r of finding an electron
near any specific point r in space is proportional to the modulus squared of the wave amplitude.
This modulus squared of the wave amplitude can therefore be viewed as a probability density.
Now that in itself is a reasonable concept in ordinary probability theory and we're just
choosing to propose that we interpret the wave function that way here.
But this idea of something being the modulus squared of a complex quantity to represent
probability density, this quantity of which we're taking the squared modulus does not
really have an analog in conventional probability theory, but we're going to call a probability
amplitude here. Or more generally, we'll talk about things like the wave function here as
a quantum mechanical amplitude. And in general, we'll be taking the modulus squareds of these
to get to real measurable physical quantities such a probability density. In principle,
we can measure this probability density by doing a bunch of experiments.
Using this squared modulus assures that we always have a positive quantity. And that's
a good thing because we would not know how to interpret a negative probability. It's
also consistent with some other uses of squared amplitudes with waves. For example, the squared
amplitude often tells us the intensity or the power per unit area or energy density
in a wave motion such as a sound wave or an electromagnetic wave.
We would also find in electromagnetism that the probability of finding a photon at some
specific point was indeed proportional to the squared wave amplitude. And if when we're
describing classical waves we choose for convenience to use a complex notation, we use the modulus
squared of that classical wave amplitude to describe the wave intensity. And hence, also
the probability of finding the photon of a specific point in space.
However, this analogy is a little dangerous because our quantum mechanical wave amplitude
itself, unlike an electromagnetic wave amplitude, does not apparently correspond to anything
measurable. For now we think of that probability amplitude as being the amplitude of a wave.
We will later on find that this concept of probability amplitudes that we're taking the
modulus squared of extends into quite different descriptions but still retaining the concept,
the modulus squared representing a probability as Born had proposed for us.