So far, we presumed the spatial probability distribution was steady in time. But quantum
mechanics must model situations that are not stationary. Indeed, we just looked at the
harmonic oscillator problem and found states that were not changing in time. The spatial
probability distribution was fixed in the energy eigen solutions we found. There was
no apparent evidence of any oscillation. Even when we're in the higher energy eigen
states, when for sure there was energy in the oscillator, nothing is apparently oscillating.
Of course, the correspondence principle is telling us-- we had better find some way of
explaining the behavior of oscillating systems. Because classically, again for sure, we know
we can make such simple harmonic oscillators oscillate.
A key point is that so far we've only looked at energy eigen states. In fact, as will become
clear, these energy eigen states have the special property that, indeed, nothing measurable
in them changes in time. To understand systems that do change in time, we need to go beyond
the idea of energy eigen states. Indeed, beyond even the idea of eigen equations. But we have
to do this in a way that connects back to our time independent Schrodinger equation
and the perfectly valid solutions we've found to that.
The key here is that we need the time dependent version of the Schrodinger equation. So here
we're going to rationalize a time dependent version of Schrodinger's equation. An important
point about it is that, perhaps surprisingly, it's not like the classical wave equation
in its mathematical form. Now, we will show how we can link this back to the time independent
version of Schrodinger's equation, of course. But then, more importantly, we will show how
to describe time dependent behavior in quantum mechanics.
Then we will introduce a very important concept in quantum mechanics, which is superposition
states. Now, perhaps we have so far only encountered these in discussions such as Schroedinger's
cat, which may make them seem bizarre. In fact, superposition states are essential for
understanding time evolution in quantum mechanics. They also make that time evolution very easy
to calculate.