The key to understanding time dependence on Schrodinger's equation is the relation between
frequency and energy in quantum mechanics. One well-known example of that is the case
of electromagnetic waves and photons. Imagine two experiments with a monochromatic-- that's
a single frequency, or single color-- electromagnetic wave. In one experiment, we measure the frequency
of oscillation in the wave.
In a second experiment, we count the number of photons per second arriving on some detector.
We can figure out some way to do that. And we also measure the power arriving on the
detector. Hence, we can count how many photons per second correspond to a particular part
of this frequency. So we know the power. We know the number of photons arriving per second.
So we can deduce the energy of the photons.
We would find, if we compared the two parts of this experiment, that the energy per photon
was Planck's constant times the frequency, h nu. Equivalently, we would have the relation
between energy and frequency for photons. We find, then, at least for photons, that
energy is proportional to frequency, with Planck's constant as the constant of proportionality.
Now, this discussion is for photons, not the electrons or other particles with mass for
which the Schrodinger equation supposedly applies.
But things like hydrogen atoms emit photons as they transition between energy levels.
So perhaps we expect some oscillation in the electrons at the corresponding frequency during
the emission of the photon. So perhaps we expect a similar relation between energy and
frequency associated with the electron levels. So now, we are generally proposing that the
relation between energy, and frequency, and quantum mechanics, not just for photons, but
for other quantum mechanical states and waves, is energy, e, equals h, Planck's constant,
times some frequency, nu. Or equivalently, h bar times omega.
So to be clear then, we have said the relation between the energy and the frequency for photons
is E is equal to h nu, or E is equal to h bar omega. What we're now proposing is that
this same relation applies more generally in quantum mechanics. The relation between
energy and frequency for quantum mechanics is E equals h nu, or E equals h bar omega.
So we want a time-dependent wave equation that somehow incorporates this idea, and we
want an equation that works for a particle with mass, m. And as I said, with this specific
relation, E is equal to h nu, or E is equal to h bar omega-- they're the same thing--
between the energy and the frequency. And for this equation, we might also reasonably
want it to have plane wave solutions, for example, of the form, E to the i, kz minus
omega t. That a well-known plane wave we've seen before. And, of course, we're interested
in the case where this might happen when we have a specific energy.
We've been talking about the idea of solutions like this when we were thinking about our
solutions with the time-independent Schrodinger equation. We were hoping we could have plane
waves. Although, there, we did not get into discussing any time dependence. But anyway,
there we had plane waves when we had a specific energy, E, and when we were sitting in a uniform
potential. So we're hoping now, we'll be able to construct an equation that has all of these
properties. It does give us plane wave solutions. And it somehow incorporates this energy condition.
And the plane wave solutions would occur when we have a uniform potential.
So Schrodinger postulated the time-dependent equation in this form. So the left-hand side
here looks just like what we had before for the time-independent part, except now our
wave function is a function of position and time. But the right-hand side looks really
quite different. We've written, instead of E, the energy times psi, which we had for
the time-independent equation, we've written i h bar d psi by dt. So note that, for a uniform
potential, that is, choosing v equals 0 for simplicity, then with E equal to h bar omega,
and as usual, our k equal to 2 m E over h bar squared, waves of this form are indeed
solutions.
That is, e to the minus psi omega t plus or minus kz, which correspond to plane waves--
propagating, in this case, the minus sign would mean in the forward direction, and the
plus sign would mean in the backward direction-- which, of course, we can write out in this
form, with Et over h bar instead of omega t here, and equivalently, we can write them
over here in this form. And in this case, the minus corresponds to backward propagating
waves, and the plus to forward propagating waves. These are solutions to of this equation,
with this condition that E is equal to h bar omega.
So we've found an equation that, indeed, does give us what we want, although it's unusual,
what we're seeing on the right-hand side. But we're getting these plane wave solutions
when we have uniform potentials and energies as we've thought about before, but with h
bar omega being the other way we could write the energy.
Now, in his time-dependent equation here, Schrodinger chose a sign for the right-hand
side. In fact, he could've set it up with either sign on the right, but he chose a plus
sign on the right. And that means that a wave with a spatial part of the form e to the plus
ikz is quite definitely a wave going in the positive z direction. It's a consequence of
the sign convention that Schrodinger choose here. And so this e to the plus ikz is definitely
a way of going in the positive z direction. And that wave, including its time-dependence,
would be, as we've seen for the case of V equals 0, e to the i kz minus E t over h bar.
This is actually just rewriting what we wrote just a second ago.
Now, is this equation compatible with the time-independent equation? And we need to
check this out before we go any further. So before we examine this time-dependent equation
further, we need to check that it's compatible with the time-independent equation. And the
time-independent equation could apply if we had states of definite energy, E, which would
be an eigenenergy. So suppose that we had, indeed, some corresponding eigenfunction,
psi of r in such a case, so that, as usual, we are satisfying Schrodinger's time-independent
equation.
As it stands, this solution, however, psi of r, is not a solution of the time-dependent
equation. Putting psi of r in here for this capital Psi of r and t simply does not work
because psi of r has no time-dependence. The right-hand side here would become 0 because
this psi of r, if we put it in here, it's got no time-dependence, so d by dt of it is
just 0. Whereas. it should be E times psi of r. So how do we get ourselves out of this
apparent contradiction?
Well, suppose that, instead of proposing the solution psi of r, we propose a solution,
capital Psi of r and t, that is, psi of r, and then multiplied by e to the minus iEt
over h bar. So in our equation here, here's our left-hand side as before. When we write
this out with our new substitution, of course, we have to add in these explicit factors here.
But we can just take those out of this part, because nothing in here depends on time. This
is a spatial derivative. So this e to the minus iEt over h bar just comes out as a factor.
And hence, what we have on the right-hand side here is E times psi of r times e to the
minus iEt over h bar. That's our time-independent equation with just this additional factor
put on both sides. There's no problem with that. This here all turned into E times psi
of r. And hence, this right-hand side is E times psi of r and t, so this proposed solution
is indeed a solution of the time-independent equation. So that's good news.
Proposing that we put this time factor in here has not caused us any problem with finding
this still to be a solution of the time-independent equation. Now, in fact, we could have put
any time varying function we liked over here, but we're proposing this specific one. So
Psi of r and t equal to psi of r times e to the minus iEt over h bar solves the time-independent
Schrodinger equation. So that's good.
Similarly, knowing that psi of r solves the time-independent equation with energy E, and
substituting in our new form in the time-dependent equation is going to give us-- well, here's
our time-dependent equation here. We've got a time derivative we have to perform. Writing
that out explicitly here, here's the whole function of which we're going to take the
time derivative. And of course, the psi of r doesn't depend on time, so it can come out
of the time derivative. So we're left with this time derivative to perform here.
But of course, that time derivative just means that we bring a minus i E over h bar out at
the front here. And that is just equal to E times this entire wave function. The minus
i here times i gives us 1. The h bars cancel. So we have E times psi of r times e to the
minus iEt over h bar. In other words, we have E times Psi of r and t. So this wave function,
psi of r, the solution of the time-independent equation, times e to the minus iEt over h
bar also solves the time-dependent Schrodinger equation.
So every solution, psi of r, of the time-independent Schrodinger equation with eigenenergy E is
also a solution of the time-dependent equation, as long as we always multiply it by a factor,
e to the minus iEt over h bar. Multiplying by this time factor, or indeed, any time factor,
makes no difference to psi of r, with this time factor being a solution of the time-independent
equation. So we can always do this. And so, if psi of r is a solution of the time-independent
Schrodinger equation with energy, E, then Psi of r and t, which is psi of r times e
to the minus iEt over h bar Is a solution of both the time-independent, and the time-dependent
Schrodinger equations. And that makes these two equations compatible.
So just to summarize again. If we had found a solution, psi of r, of the time-independent
equation with energy E, then we can always choose to multiply that by this factor. The
resulting product wave function will still be a solution of the time-independent equation,
but now, it will also be a solution of the time-dependent equation. So provided we always
remember to do this every time we find a spatial eigenfunction, this new wave function will
also be a solution of the time-dependent Schrodinger equation.
Now, at this point, you may be a little worried. We've been talking about a time-independent
Schrodinger equation, and a time-independent solution, but we seem to have added an oscillation
onto it. Therefore, is our time-independent solution not time-independent anymore? In
other words, if we propose this solution here, Psi of r t equal to psi of r times e to the
minus iEt over h bar, surely this thing is not, anymore, a time-independent solution.
After all, we've got a time dependence in it. So if we propose this solution to a time-independent
problem, can this really represent something that is stable in time? And on the face of
it, it would seem that it can't.
But it can, because the measurable quantities associated with this state or this wave function
are indeed stable in time. For example, probability density here. We can take the probability
density, taking the modulus squared of this wave function, and all that happens is that
these e to the iEt over h bar and e to the minus iEt over h bar factors just multiply
out to 1. And so, indeed, the probability density that we would have calculated from
our original solution to the time-independent Schrodinger equation is still the probability
density that we calculate now.
And of course, what this is pointing up is that the wave function itself may not be the
thing with physical meaning, but the modulus squared is the thing with physical meaning.
And even though we've added this time factor in to the time-independent solution, we have
not changed any results associated with that time-independent solution. For example, the
measurable probability density is the same, so we have not changed any measurable results
that we would get.
Now we've proposed the time-dependent Schrodinger equation, and we've checked that it's compatible
with the time-independent one. Note, however, that the time-dependent Schrodinger equation
unlike the time-independent one, is not, in general, an eigenvalue equation. It's not
an equation that only has solutions for particular values of a parameter, an eigenvalue. Though,
as we have seen, it is quite compatible with the eigensolutions of the time-independent
equation. The time-dependent equation supports a much richer set of solutions, as we will
see in the next section.