We're going to look now at the problem of a particle, like an electron, in a well of
finite depth. To anticipate the answers, I'm showing here the typical results we'll get
for this problem. Just like the infinitely-deep potential well, we're going to get solutions
for very specific energies. Though here, there will only be a finite number of them confined
to the well. You can see three in this example here.
We will also see a combination of the kinds of behaviors we've been looking at. Inside
the well itself, we are seeing sinusoidal solutions, though, because these walls have
only a finite height, these sinusoidal solutions do not hit 0 at the walls, but rather, they
penetrate some distance into the walls. We can see that the higher energy solutions penetrate
further into the walls, which is, again, what we would expect from our experience with the
particles and barriers of finite height. We also see, as before, that each higher energy
solution has one more 0 than the previous one. So now, let's see how we derive all this
behavior.
So let's look at our finite potential well. We're going to choose the height of the barrier
here to be V 0 on either side of our potential well. And we'll choose the origin for our
energies. Down at the bottom here is 0 for potential energies and all of our other energies.
The thickness of the well will be L z, as before, but now we're going to choose the
position origin in the middle of the well. This will turn out to make our algebra much
more convenient to write down. So we'll be going from minus L z over 2 on the left, to
plus L z over 2 on the right, and z is moving in this direction, of course.
So if there is an eigenenergy, E, for which there's a solution to this problem, then we
already know what form that solution has to take. It has to be sinusoidal or cosinusoidal
in some way in the middle, because the energy is going to be above the bottom of this well.
And it has to be exponentially decaying on either side. We'll throw away the exponentially
growing solutions on both sides as being unphysical. The particle would not be anywhere in the
middle if we did that, and we wouldn't be able to normalize the wave functions. So we
keep just the decaying parts of the exponential on both sides.
So, for some eigenenergy, E, that we are hoping to figure out here, we know that if we knew
what E was then the k vector, or the k magnitude in the middle of the well would be the square
root of 2m E over h bar squared, where m was the mass of our particle. And similarly, for
the exponential decay constant on either side, with our energy, E, below the top of the barrier,
then we would have kappa equal to the square root of 2m, V 0 minus E, all over h bar squared.
So for z less than minus L z over 2, that's over here, we would be saying the solution
is a decaying exponential. Now, because we're heading off in negative directions, we've
got a positive written exponent here, but this is going to decay as we move to larger
negative z, and some unknown coefficient, G, out front.
And in the middle, between minus L z over 2 here, and L z over 2, we're going to have
some sort of sinusoidal or cosinusoidal solution, we've still got to figure that out, with two
unknown coefficients, A in front of the sine part, and B in front of the cosine part. And
then for z greater than L z over 2, we're going to have an exponentially decaying function
on the right, Fe to the minus kappa z. And of course, we still have to figure out all
of these constants, A, B, F, and G, as we work through our solution.
To move forward here, we're going to need to apply the boundary conditions to solve
for the unknown coefficients in this problem. So those are the constants, A, B, F, and G,
and of course, we hope to establish the eigenenergies, E, as well. And so, just to summarize, our
solution on the left is going to look like this, our solution in the middle is going
to look like this, and our solution on the right is going to look like this, with these
constants we're trying to figure out. We only need to figure out three of them in our algebra,
actually, because we could establish the fourth one by normalizing the entire wave function
if we wanted to.
So let's start looking at this problem and we'll be looking at boundary conditions. First
of all, we'll look at the boundary condition corresponding to continuity of the wave function.
Now incidentally, this algebra is going to take quite a few steps, and it will seem moderately
complicated. Each of the steps is straightforward, but it does take awhile to go through them
all. And I would say this is about as complicated a problem as we want to tackle in this kind
of analytic fashion. More complicated problems like this, we would solve by numerical techniques
probably, but we can manage this analytically, and it will show us quite a lot of interesting
things. So we're going to work through it even though it will take us a little bit of
time and a little bit of algebra.
So here's our wave function at L z over 2. Just on the right-hand side of the barrier,
it's going to start out like this. And just on the left-hand side a the barrier over here,
we're going to have some combination of sine and cosine-like wave functions. To simplify
our writing, instead of writing e to the minus kappa L z over 2, we're going to write instead,
X sub L. And instead of writing sine kL z over 2, we're going to write instead just
S sub L. And instead of writing cos kL z over 2, we're going to write just C sub L.
So writing this equation for continuity of the wave function, that this should equal
this, in our shorthand notation, that becomes FX L equals AS L plus BC L. So this is the
exponential decaying part. This is the sinusoidal part. This is the cosinusoidal part at L z
over 2.
Similarly, at z equal to minus L z over 2, we would have GX L is minus AS L plus BC L.
And continuity of the derivative, the other boundary condition, will give us, at z equal
to minus L z over 2, GX L multiplied by kappa would equal to k times AC L plus BS L, or
we can take that k down here. We get kappa from differentiating the exponential, and
we get the k from differentiating the sines and cosines here.
Remember, differentiating a sine gives us a cosine. Differentiating a cosine gives us
a sine with a minus sign in front of it. But the argument here is minus L z over 2, so
that minus sign combines with the minus sign corresponding to this and gives us a plus
sign in here. And at z equal to L z over 2, we're similarly going to get this relation
from the continuity of the derivative.
So we've got four relations. These two from the continuity of the wave function, and these
two from the continuity of the derivative of the wave function. Now, what we need to
do is to find what solutions are compatible with these relations that we've derived from
the boundary conditions.
So we can add this equation to this equation. These are two of the equations we got from
the continuity of the wave function at the boundary. And when I say adding two equations,
I mean I'm going to add the left-hand side and see what that gives me, and I'm going
to the right-hand sides and see what that gives me. The sum of these left-hand sides
must equal the sum of these right-hand sides.
So that would give us 2BC sub L, but these two terms would cancel. So I'm going to bring
those over to the left here. Adding these two up, I'm going to put them on the left.
And then adding these two up will give us F plus G times X L. Similarly, subtracting
one of the continuity of the derivative conditions we came up with from the other one, subtracting
one of these from the other, subtracting this one from this one, these terms are going to
cancel out. And we'll be left with 2BS L and kappa over k F plus G, times X L.
Now, as long as F is not equal to minus G, so anything other than the condition F equals
minus G, then we can divide one of these equations by another one of these equations. If F was
equal to minus G, this would be 0 and we can't divide by 0. It doesn't give us a definite
answer. So if F is not equal to minus G, we can divide one of these by the other, which
means we end up with sine over cosine, which is tangent.
The other terms cancel. The two B's cancel on both sides, and we've got just the same
thing here as we have here, so we're left with the kappa over k. So we get tangent kL
z over 2 is equal to kappa over k. And this is a relation that, in the end, will allow
us to figure out what the eigenvalues are, the energy eigenvalues.
Subtracting this equation from this equation, I'll get cancellation of these terms and I'll
end up with 2AS L here, so here's 2AS L, and I subtracted this one from this one, so I've
got F minus G times X L. Adding these two boundary condition relations, similarly, I'm
going to cancel these two terms. I'm going to end up with two of those. So there's my
2AC L on the left, and adding these two gives me minus kappa over k, F minus G, times X
L.
So now, as long as F is not equal to G, we can divide this equation we just figured out,
by this equation we just figured out. Again, if F is equal to G, this would be 0 and we
can't divide by 0. So as long as F is not equal to G, we can divide this equation by
this equation.
That gives us minus the cotangent of kL z over 2 is equal to kappa over k. Cosine over
sine gives us a cotangent, and we had a minus sign sitting here that we've taken over to
the left-hand side. And this relation is also effectively a condition for eigenvalues, and
we're going to work with this relation later on to figure out the energy eigenvalues also.
So for any case other than F equals G, which leaves tangent of kL z over 2 equal to kappa
over k, but not this condition. We can't get that condition because we'd be dividing by
0 and we wouldn't get this. Or, so either this condition or this condition, F equals
minus G, which would give us this condition applying, but not this condition. For any
case other than these two, we would appear to have both of these relations trying to
apply.
But that can't work, because the tangent of this is never equal to the cotangent of this.
And so, these two would contradict one another. So the conclusion is that the only possibilities
are that F is equal to G, or that F is equal to minus G. So, first possibility, F is equal
to G, and then this condition is going to apply, or F is equal to minus G, and this
condition is going to apply.
So let's look at the condition F is equal to G, in which case, we know that this condition
is going to apply. Well, note from this equation that we had here and this one that we had
there that, if F is equal to G, this is 0 and this is 0. So the right-hand side of both
of these equations are 0. But it's not possible for S L, the sine, and C L, the cosine, to
be 0 at the same time. If the sine is 0, the cosine isn't 0, and if the cosine is 0, the
sine isn't 0. So the only way that these equations can work is that if A is equal to 0.
Hence, inside the well, A has to be equal to 0. That means the sine part disappears
because it was A sine kz plus B cos kz, so we are only left with the cosine kind of wave
in the middle of the well. And here's two cosine-like results that we might get. So
this is cosinusoidal, relative to the middle of the well. It's falling off on either side.
Similarly with this one. This is also cosinusoidal. These would have different k values associated
with them, and at the moment, we're just guessing that these would turn out to be eigenenergies,
but we'll prove that later on.
Note that these functions are both even functions. That is, whatever value they have on the right
of the center, they have the same value on the symmetric point on the left of the center.
And that's true here as well.
The other possibility would be that F is equal to minus G, in which case, this condition
would be holding. And again, if we note from these two equations, if F is equal to minus
G, then this is 0 and this is 0. So the right-hand sides of both equations are 0. But we never
have a condition where the cosine and the sine are both 0. It's not possible. So as
before, now we conclude that B has to equal 0. Hence, inside the well in this case, we
have to have the sinusoidal solution. Remember, it was A sine kz plus C cos kz. Now the B
has to be 0, so we're just left with the sinusoidal part in the middle here. And that is an example
of a kind of result we could get there. Again, guessing for the moment that this is an eigenenergy.
And we see this is an odd function. Everywhere on the right, if we look at the corresponding
point on the left, we see the function on the left is minus what we had on the right.
That's true, both for the sinusoidal parts, and the exponential parts.
Now, though we found the nature of these possible solutions, we've not yet proved that these
are actual solutions. We still have to figure out what the eigenenergies would be. So we've
not yet formally solved for the eigenenergies, E. And hence, we've not yet formally deduced
what k and kappa actually are, because we need to know E in order to figure those out.
We're going to find E by solving these equations.
Now, these equations don't solve in a simple analytic way. But we can still solve them.
At least, we could solve them numerically, and there's a nice graphical way of looking
at the solutions of these equations. So let's solve for the eigenenergies.
We're going to change to dimensionless units here. The energy unit we're going to use is
this one. We'll take this as our unit of energy, which is, incidentally, the first level in
an infinitely deep potential well. You may remember that formula here, but it's a convenient
unit, nonetheless. And it does have some physical meaning to it.
So this is going to be our energy unit. So instead of talking about energies, E, for
the moment, we're going to talk about energies, epsilon, which are E divided by this energy
unit. So this is actually a dimensionless quantity. And similarly, we can talk about
a barrier height here, and nu naught, that is, actually, which is V naught divided by
our energy unit.
Also, in terms of these energy units, originally, we had this formula for k. We can rewrite
that in here using this quantity E 1 infinity. Just a little algebraic manipulation, putting
this in. You can check that. An equivalently, that's pi over L z times the square root of
this dimensionless energy, epsilon.
And similarly, for kappa, this was our original formula for kappa, we can check this substitution
in here. We put in this energy inside the square root and check this all out. You'll
find it's equal to that. Or equivalently, pi over L z times the square root of nu naught
minus epsilon.
So, consequently, we have this equation for kappa over k written in the dimensionless
units, nu naught minus epsilon over epsilon, the square of that. And for kL z over 2, using
these dimensionless units, we would have E over E 1 infinity here in the square root
with Pi over 2, or in dimensionless units, that's pi over 2 times the square root of
epsilon. And for kappa L z over 2, again, similarly, we would write that as pi over
2, the square root of nu naught minus epsilon.
So this tangent equation, tan kL z over 2 equal to kappa over k, becomes tan of pi over
2 times the square root of epsilon, equal to the square root of nu naught minus epsilon
over epsilon. Or, we will rewrite that, for a reason that will come apparent quite soon,
in the following form, taking the square root of epsilon over to the left-hand side and
putting it in front of the tangent here, and leaving the square root of nu naught minus
epsilon on the right.
Similarly, for the cotangent condition, it will become, similarly, just the square root
of nu naught minus epsilon over epsilon on the right, and pi over 2 root epsilon inside
the argument, or equivalently, we can take that root epsilon over to the left here as
well.
So now, let's look at how we're going to do a graphical solution of these equations. We're
going to choose a specific well depth. We can do this calculation for any specific well
depth. So suppose, for example, we chose a well depth of two units. And what we do here
is we plot this curve, which is the right-hand side of these various equations, and that's
what it would look like for two units of well depth. Or, for five units of well depth, it
would look like this. Again, you see, it's this kind of square root curve. Or, for eight
units of well depth, it would look like this.
So we start our solution by choosing the well depth for our problem, and we graph up this
curve on here as a result. Then, we add the curves corresponding to the left-hand sides
of the equation. So one of those curves is square root of epsilon times this tangent,
so that gives us this function here. Actually, that heads up to infinity, and then it comes
back from minus infinity and goes on like that.
And the other one is the cotangent curve, again, with the square root of epsilon in
front of it, minus square root of epsilon times the cotangent. And that gives us these
blue curves here. And again, this one headed up to infinity, and came back from minus infinity.
Now, for a specific nu naught, such as nu naught equals to eight here, the solutions
of our problem, the eigenenergies, are the values of epsilon at the intersections of
this curve, the square root curve, and these two curves here. So explicitly, one of those
solutions, one of these intersections, is for epsilon equal to 0.663, and we could get
that off this graph, if we'd used a very sharp pencil to do it. Of course, we can solve these
on the computer as well by simultaneously solving this relation here with this one.
And the second solution would be with the cotangent, and that would occur at 2.603 energy
units. And the third solution would occur at 5.609 energy units. And you'll note, there
are no more solutions here. That are only these three intersections with this curve
here, and either the tangent or cotangent curves. So there are only three eigensolutions
inside the well.
So these are the actual solutions. Of course, I knew the answer before I started this, so
what I was plotting you before were the actual solutions to problem, but we'd not proved
that at that point. This is the first solution here. This is the second one. And this is
the third one. And there are only three such solutions in a well of this height, of this
depth.
Note that they are all, incidentally, at lower energies than the corresponding solutions
we would get for an infinitely deep well of the same width. So this is 0.663 here. And
if we look at the solutions that we would have got for an infinitely deep well of the
same width, this would be where the first solution would be for that infinitely deep
well. This is where the second solution would be. And this is where the third solution would
be. And all of these are at lower energies, and the reason for that is that they are less
curved.
So in the original potential well with infinite depth, I had to fit an entire half-period
of a sinusoidal wave in here. You'll see I'm not fitting an entire half-period of the correspondingly
sinusoidal or cosinusoidal wave here. This wave is not as curved, and so it has less
kinetic energy. And the same thing is true for the other ones.