Now we're going to look at one of the most important problems in quantum mechanics, just
as it was in classical mechanics. That is the harmonic oscillator. Like the infinitely
deep potential well, or that particle in a box problem, as we've called it, this is an
exactly solvable problem.
It is slightly more complicated than the particle in that infinitely deep box, but it's still
relatively straightforward to solve, especially if we already know the answer. Many kinds
of quantum mechanical systems can be based on the simple harmonic oscillator, at least
as a good first approximation. Obviously we expect to be able to handle simple mechanical
oscillators, some sort of tiny mass on a spring, such as vibrations of atoms in a molecule.
As is also well known in classical mechanics, more complicated systems of many masses connected
by springs can be reduced to a set of separate harmonic oscillator problems. Sometimes in
ordinary classical mechanics, those are called the normal modes of the system. We are going
to defer thinking about such more complicated systems in detail for now, but they can describe
the ways that atoms vibrate in large molecules, or crystalline solids, for example.
But ultimately, we may describe those vibrations quantum mechanically as so-called phonon modes.
Another extremely important use of the harmonic oscillator is that mathematically it forms
a basis for our understanding of the quantum mechanics of light, eventually leading to
the idea of photons. We're going to have to postpone that discussion about the quantum
mechanics of light, unfortunately.
But this discussion also points out for us the crucial importance of this problem in
our understanding of quantum mechanics in the world around us. To start, we will simply
consider a quantum mechanical version of that simple mass on the spring type of oscillator.
Before starting that, we're going to remind ourselves briefly again of the classical harmonic
oscillator.
So we remember that we have a mass M on a spring, and we are going to have a restoring
force on that mass. If we pull the mass down by an amount y, then we're going to get a
restoring force F minus K times y, where K is our spring constant. And as we said, this
is a restoring force. That's why there's a minus sign in here, trying to pull the mass
back towards 0.
And this gives a simple harmonic oscillator, as we looked at before. And we analyzed that
in the classical case with Newton's second law, force is equal to mass times acceleration,
and the force here is minus K times y, and the acceleration is d2y by dt squared. And
so we could rearrange that to get this equation here, of which the solutions are oscillatory
with an angular frequency omega,
in this case, the square root of K over M, and so that gives something like, for example,
the sinusoidal solution, and we saw that before. So the mass bounces up and down here with
an angular frequency omega.
To analyze this same oscillator quantum mechanically, we're going to look at this problem with potentials,
rather than forces. We could have done this also in classical mechanics as an option,
for example, using what is known as Hamiltonian classical mechanics. In quantum mechanics,
as I said earlier, we tend not to work directly with forces, and much prefer this approach
in terms of potentials.
Schroedinger's wave equation is also set up that way from the beginning, of course. So
let's see how we construct our quantum mechanical solution. So again, we have our mass on a
spring. We're going to use small m here, because we like that for our quantum mechanical particles.
We're going to use z for our coordinate here. Again, we've tended to set up our quantum
mechanical equations that way.
And the potential, the potential energy corresponding to this restoring force F is something we
can work out. The potential will be the integral from 0 to z of the force times the distance.
The force is minus F here, because it's restoring. We have to use a dummy variable, of course,
to do our integration, so that we don't confuse the integration variable with the endpoint
of the integration.
And in our case, we know the restoring force is K times the displacement, which I'm calling
z nought here in the integration, so integrating this all up here is going to give me 1/2 Kz
squared. And that is a potential energy as a function of displacement z, so that looks
like a parabola here. A nice parabola. V of z is equal to 1/2 Kz squared.
So that's the potential energy we're going to be able to put into our equations to solve
this quantum mechanical problem. Also, of course, we know that this, from a classical
oscillator, is the same thing as 1/2 m omega squared, where omega is the oscillation frequency
of the classical oscillator, times the z squared. So, we can put this potential energy into
a Schroedinger equation.
So here's our Schroedinger equation, with this as the potential energy inserted directly
in here. We would normally have V of z in our Schroedinger equation. We've now put in
this explicit form. And again, we're going to convert to dimensionless units. It makes
our life just a little easier for writing the algebra. So our unit of distance is going
to be xi, and we're going to write that as the square root of m omega over h bar times
z.
So this is xi as this factor here times z. So it's a distance unit in the z direction,
but with this factor in. If we do that, our Schroedinger equation simplifies a little
bit. It becomes dimensionless, and we can write it as 1/2 d2 psi by d xi squared minus
xi squared over 2 times psi is equal to minus E over h bar omega psi. So mathematically,
we can write it in this form.
So no physics has changed here, we just made a mathematical substitution. Now, one specific
solution to this equation, which you can check out, is psi proportional to the exponential
of minus xi squared over 2. You may recognize this as a Gaussian function. And incidentally,
in the solution I'm go to present to you here, I'm just going to show you what the solution
is.
We're not formally going to derive it, though you can certainly check that the solutions
I'm giving you are correct. We could show how to derive the solution this way. Actually,
later on, there's a much more elegant way to derive the solution, so we won't go through
the mathematics of deriving it the hard way. I'm just going to tell you the solutions,
and you can check them if you want to.
So as I said, this particular expression would be a solution to this equation, which you
can easily check. And this would have a corresponding energy of h bar omega over 2. Now, this may
suggest to us, because we've got this behavior here, that maybe we'll try to write solutions
out in this form. Actually, we could always do this. All we're saying is I don't know
what these functions are yet.
I can always write out the solutions in terms of some functions I don't know times some
other functions I do know, though this is going to turn out to be much more interesting
than that. So I'm just going to say, well, let's just decide to write these potential
solutions here as e to the minus xi squared over 2 times some other functions. And we're
looking for functions of different quantum numbers, if you like here.
There can be all sorts of different solutions we hope to get with this index n. And as I
said, this set of functions here is just a set of functions still to be determined. So
what we could do is, just proposing this form, we could substitute it back into our Schroedinger
equation up there. And what we will get is a somewhat different differential equation
just for this set of functions here.
So all we're doing is we're taking this function, substituting into the Schroedinger equation,
and what that's going to give us is another differential equation that this set of functions
has to obey. So that's easy enough to do. We simply substitute. It takes a little bit
of algebra, but not too much, and we're not going to go through that algebra.
And the answer to that is, after substituting this into a Schroedinger equation, we get
a different differential equation that this function has to satisfy, and this is the equation
here. And it turns out the solutions to this equation are actually quite well known. And
they are technically what are called Hermite polynomials, or we usually say Hermite, but
that's not really correct. But Hermite polynomials.
And we know a lot about Hermite polynomials. These solutions here exist provided, and only
if, the energy satisfies this equation. If 2E over h bar omega minus 1 is equal to 2
times an integer, and the integer can start here at 0, then 1 and 2. If this is true,
solutions to this equation exist, and that means, therefore, they only have solutions
if the energy is n plus 1/2 times h bar omega.
So these are eigenenergies of this problem. A note here, it's quite important that n starts
at 0 here. It can be 1, can be 2, but it can also be 0. Note these eigenenergies are all
equally spaced. They're all spaced apart from the next neighbor by h bar omega. So the allowed
energy levels are equally spaced, separated by h bar omega. And remember, omega is the
classical oscillation frequency.
Like the potential well that we saw before, there is a zero point energy. Even if we go
to n equals 0, we're still left with an energy of h bar omega over 2, of half h bar omega.
So that same phenomenon is occurring here again. It's a consequence of the quantum confinement.
So let's look at the Hermite polynomials. The first few of these are, well, the first
one turns out to be trivial. It's just a constant. We could call it 1.
The second one is just a linearly varying function. It's just a straight line going
through the origin. The third one is a particular kind of parabola here, so some sort of parabola.
The next one up, number three-- remember, we're starting from 0-- number three is a
cubic of some kind, and number four is a fourth order polynomial of some kind. So here's the
first few of them.
And note, incidentally, that these functions are either even, so this one's even, this
one's even, this one's even-- only contains even powers of xi-- or odd, only contains
odd powers of xi. So they have definite parity. All of these solutions of definite parity
are either even or odd. Even, odd, even. And mathematically, there's a way of working these
out, and we're not going to prove this, but you can look these things up in books of special
functions.
There's what's called a recurrence relation, which says basically, successive Hermite polynomials
can be calculated if you knew the previous two Hermite polynomials. So if I knew these
two Hermite polynomials, I can use this recurrence relation to calculate this one, and so on.
So it's quite easy to calculate these polynomials if you need to. We can normalize this. That
takes a bit of work, and again, we're not going to go through that algebra.
We can figure out what these An's are, and the answer to that is in this dimensionless
form, it would be this 1 over the square root of pi times 2 to the n times n factorial,
and the square root of the whole thing. As I say, we could prove that. It would take
a little bit of work to do it, and this would therefore be in the dimensionless form, this
set of eigensolutions of the harmonic oscillator equation.
So here's our dimensional-less distance here, and we can express the answers in terms of
those, or we can express it in terms of the original coordinates. It looks a little messier
here if we use the original distances, but these are the actual solutions, the eigenfunctions,
and these are the eigenenergies. So we've solved this problem for eigenfunctions and
eigenenergies.
And let's just look at what they look like. So I'm plotting here, first of all, these
are the energy levels, these orange dashed lines here. You'll see they're equally spaced,
and they're 1/2 h bar omega-- they're in units of h bar omega-- 1 half, 1 and 1/2, and so
on. We'll look at those in more detail in a minute. I've also plotted the parabola,
which is the potential energy.
That's just for comparison. We'll see in a minute the comparison we're going to make
there. So here's the first eigenfunction. It's this nice form here. It's basically a
Gaussian, if you're used to that form. The energy is h bar omega over 2 compared to the
energy at the bottom of the parabolic potential energy. The second one is this Gaussian multiplied
by a linearly varying function, so you can see it's an odd function, because this is
odd.
And its energy is 3 h bar omega over 2. The next one is this parabolic function multiplying
the Gaussian, so it's an even function, and its energy is 5 h bar omega over 2. And here's
the n equals 3 one. It's a cubic odd function, multiplying the Gaussian. So here you see
this is odd.
7 h bar omega over 2 is the energy, and the last one in our example here is the n equals
4 function. Energy is 9 h bar omega over 2, and it's got a symmetric fourth order polynomial
here. So this is an even function. Incidentally, the intersections of this parabola, the potential
energy, and the dashed lines corresponding to the eigenenergies occur at exactly the
point of what we would call classical turning.
That is, if you imagine that this was a classical oscillator for a moment, and you gave a ball
inside this potential, this amount of energy, it would go down, come back up here. We get
exactly to this point, and then we bounce all the way back around again. So these intersections
are the so-called classical turning points. Again, if you gave a ball this much energy
in the classical problem, it would go down from here up to here.
It would bounce down and back up, and it would turn around at exactly these points. So the
classical turning points, where a classical mass of this energy, whatever one you've chosen,
turns around and goes back downhill. So that is a physical interpretation in a correspondence
back to the quantum mechanical problem, in the classical one.
Now we have found the eigensolutions to Schroedinger's time independent wave equation for the case
of a harmonic oscillator. It has some very interesting characteristics, especially that
the energy levels are equally spaced. It's the only potential, this parabolic potential,
that has this attribute. And they're spaced by h bar omega, where omega is the frequency,
the angular frequency that the classical oscillator with the same mass and the same parabolic
potential energy would have.
Viewed just as a particle and a potential, just like the particle and a box, there's
a particle and a potential, this problem could be viewed as just a particularly interesting
example of such an eigenproblem. We have allowed discrete energies, and each has its own wave
function. And incidentally, this set of eigenfunctions, we have found, also forms a complete set for
describing functions of position in one direction.
But of course, there's something very odd here. We're supposed to be finding solutions
of the harmonic oscillator. Surely something should be oscillating. What we have here so
far looks nothing like an oscillator. Certainly nothing like the classical version that would
have a particle moving backwards and forwards, or up and down. In fact, in these quantum
mechanical energy eigenstates, there is no oscillation. These are actually static solutions.
Take the modulus squared of any of these wave functions, and you get a completely static,
unchanging probability distribution. It's different for the different eigenstates, being
wider and more bumps in it for the higher energy eigenstates, and narrower and fewer
bumps in it for the lower ones, but none of these is anything apparently moving. Now,
this is perplexing.
Perhaps in the lowest state, we might understand why there's no oscillation. The particle has
essentially been sitting in its lowest state near the bottom of the parabolic potential
well. But in the higher states, the particle certainly has some energy. Quantum mechanically,
though, it turns out there's nothing wrong here. It's actually quite possible, quantum
mechanically, to have this oscillator in higher energy eigenstates, and still have no real
oscillation.
But how do we get actual oscillation, then? After all, our quantum mechanics has to explain
everything that classical mechanics does also. And it's certainly true that classical oscillators
oscillate.
To resolve this apparent contradiction, and to understand how we can actually get oscillation
in quantum mechanics, and indeed, other kinds of changes and movements in quantum mechanical
systems, we need to look at Schroedinger's time dependent equation, not just the time
independent version we've studied so far. And that will be the subject of our next section.