So let's look, then, at some specific uncertainty
principles.
We can go back and look again at the position momentum
uncertainty principle.
We can formally derive it now without presuming Gaussians or
any other specific forms of distributions.
We consider the commutator of the momentum operator and x,
where we're treating x as the operator for position in this
one direction, x.
And to be sure we're taking the derivatives correctly, we
will have the commutator operate on
an arbitrary function.
So we've got the commutator of px and x operating on f, and
we have minus ih bar d by dx from the px operator.
So this is px, x, and this one comes from x, px, and we have
it operating on our arbitrary function.
And when we do that, we can explicitly multiply
these out like this.
And taking the derivative with respect to x of this product
here gives us two terms, one of which is just f, and the
other of which is x d by dx of f.
But that cancels out with this term, and so we're left with
minus ih bar times f-- the function f.
Since this function was arbitrary, then we can drop it
on both sides here, and get this operator equation
in this form here.
So the operator that corresponds to the commutator
of px and x is just minus ih bar, or technically, this
multiplied by the identity operator.
And the commutation rest operator, therefore, is just
this number minus h bar, or technically, minus h bar times
the identity operator.
Hence, the average value-- the expectation value of this
operator for any state is just minus h bar.
And in this case, we have an uncertainty principle that is
going to apply to any conceivable
state of the system.
So from our general form of the uncertainty principle,
which we wrote like this, then for our position and momentum
uncertainty principle in the direction x, we're left with
this expression.
We can also look at another uncertainty principle, and
this one is between time and energy.
This is not quite on such sound theoretical ground as
some of the others, and we'll see why in a minute.
But it does work.
The energy operator is the Hamiltonian H, and from
Schrodinger's equation, we write H operating on psi is
just the same thing as ih bar d by dt of psi.
And so we identify that we can write down the Hamiltonian as
this operator, d by dt.
Now, if we take the time operator to be just t, we can
work through this here.
It's not quite clear that we really have a time operator in
this quantum mechanic, so this is a little less rigorous from
a mathematical and perhaps physical point of view.
But nonetheless, we can derive an uncertainty principle here,
at least by analogy.
Then, using essentially identical algebra as we just
used for the momentum position uncertainty principle, then we
can take the commutator of H and t for time.
Exactly the same algebra, as I said.
And we get ih bar, or technically ih bar times an
identity operator.
And that enables us to propose an uncertainty principle for
energy and time that is delta E times delta t is greater
than or equal to h bar over 2.
And that turns out to be a useful relation.
It certainly works in the situations we
typically look at.
And this, of course, is very closely related to a frequency
time uncertainty principle that is quite rigorous in
Fourier analysis.
We would use, actually, mathematically, an identical
form of proof here to get this uncertainty principle in
Fourier analysis.
And we can get it by analogy, at least from our energy time
uncertainty principle by noting the energy is h bar
omega here.
So therefore, delta omega delta t is greater than or
equal to half just by taking the h bar out of both sides of
our energy time uncertainty principle.
But quite rigorously, from a mathematical point of view, we
conceptually derive this uncertainty principle in
ordinary classical Fourier analysis.