Having set up the general linear algebra we're going to use for our quantum mechanics, now
we can look at some consequences in quantum mechanics that we can understand from that
mathematics. As we said, a postulate of quantum mechanics is that all measurable quantities
can be associated with a Hermitian operator, for example, energy, the Hamiltonian operator,
and momentum. Other measurable quantities including position, angular momentum, and
spin angular momentum, for example, also have to have operators.
We should note as an aside here that some operators that are useful in quantum mechanics
are not Hermitian, for example, non-Hermitian creation and annihilation operators that are
used extensively in quantum optics. Though these non-Hermitian operators are mathematically
very useful, they do not represent physically measurable quantities, so they do not have
to be Hermitian. We will have to postpone any discussion of these operators for some
later time, however.
Now, we're going to look at some of the important properties of these Hermitian operators that
are associated with measurable quantities. In particular, we will be looking in general
at what we can say about eigenvalues and eigenvectors of these Hermitian operators and about the
eigenvectors of different Hermitian operators. How do we know if two operators can have the
same eigenvectors? This in turn is related more generally to the idea of uncertainty
principles.
We will start by looking at what happens when two Hermitian operators commute or don't commute.
This has some very important and quite physical consequences. In general, in quantum mechanics,
we're going to be working, of course, a lot with Hermitian operators because they represent
observables, observable quantities in quantum mechanics. And if we have two Hermitian operators,
A and B, representing possibly different physical observables or different physical variables,
it's very important to know if these operators commute. That is, is A after B the same thing
as B after A?
Remember that because these linear operators obey the same algebra as matrices and indeed
we can essentially always choose to write them as matrices, then in general, this is
not true. It's not in general true that for two operators or two matrices that A after
B is the same thing as B after A. It can be true, but it's not always true.
For quantum mechanics, it's useful algebraically to define an entity, this entity here, which
is A after B minus B after A. And we call this entity with these square brackets here
the commutator. An equivalent statement there for just saying that A after B is equal to
B after A is to say that the commutator is 0.
Now strictly here, A and B are operators, and the 0 on the right, if we wanted to be
strict about it, is actually a number, so this isn't mathematically quite correct. But
we could if we wanted, add an identity operator on the right to make it a mathematically correct
statement. However, mostly for historical reasons because we started out using differential
operators in here, we don't typically bother to write the identity operator explicitly
here.
So if it looks like we're writing operator on the left equals number on the right, we
will usually find that it's all right just to put in an identity operator there if we
want to keep this mathematically correct. But usually, we don't bother to write this
identity operator, so it will usually be obvious from context whether there should be an identity
operator in there or not. But mostly in the algebra with commentators, we are not at all
careful to make sure that what we have on the right here is a written as an operator
even though it has to be an operator in a statement like this.
Now, if the operators do not commute with one another, that means this is not true.
This would be the case if the operators do commute with one another. And in general then,
we can choose to write that whatever they do equal on the right is some operator, and
by convention, for no particularly strong reason, we tend to write whatever the operator
on the right is here, we write it as i times C where C is some operator.
So if the commutator of A and B is not equal to 0, we have to say it's equal to something,
and we'll say that it's equal to i times C. And we sometimes refer to this operator, C,
as the remainder of commutation or what we could call the commutation rest.
Now, we're going to look at two important statements about commuting operators and sets
of eigenfunctions. So our two statements are, operators that commute share the same set
of eigenfunctions, and operators that share the same set of eigenfunctions commute. So
these are not the same statement. They're two quite different statements, but they're
both true in the case of commuting operators. And we're going to prove both of these statements.
Technically, we're only going to prove them for the case of non-degenerate eigenfunctions
and eigenvalues, although we can, in fact, complete the proof even for the case where
we have degenerate eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, that is, multiple eigenfunctions for the same
eigenvalue. But we won't through go through that minor complication in the algebra here.
So let's look at this proof. Suppose that operators A and B do commute, and suppose
that the psi n here are the eigenfunctions of the operator A, and those correspond to
eigenvalues Ai. Then because these operators commute, A after B operating on psi should
be the same thing as B after A operating on the same psi, that psi i here. And of course,
we know what A operating on psi i gives us by definition because the Ai are the eigenvalues
of the operator A. Then A operating on psi i gives us Ai times psi i.
And of course, this is just a number here, so we can move it around. It commutes with
everything. So that means this is all equal to the number Ai times the operator acting
on psi i. So that means that A after B operating on psi i is Ai times B operating on psi i.
And I put these inside these brackets here-- these are not commutator brackets; they're
just brackets-- to emphasize that this object in here is just a vector.
So we have A operating on a vector is giving us Ai times that vector. But that means that
this vector must be the eigenvector psi i or be proportional to it, because we have
A operating on this vector gives us Ai times the same vector. And since by assumption here,
you're presuming non-degenerate eigenvalues, then this vector here must be psi i or be
proportional to it.
That is, for some possibly quite different number Bi, B operating on psi i must give
us some number times psi i. Because as we said, this vector here must really be just
psi i within some constant or other.
This kind of relation, of course, that B operating on psi i gives us a number Bi times psi i
holds for all of these eigenfunctions here. We didn't care which of the eigenfunctions
we chose for this particular proof so far. So these eigenfunctions are also the eigenfunctions
of the operator B because this is just an eigen equation, and this has to hold for all
of these eigenfunctions here. We just proved that.
In this case, the eigenvalues are these numbers Bi. Hence, we've proved our first statement
that operators that commute share the same set of eigenfunctions. Note that in general,
these numbers Ai and Bi are not the same numbers. They could conceivably be, but they are not
necessarily the same numbers, but the eigenvectors have to be the same eigenvectors.
Now, consider the statement, operators that share the same set of eigenfunctions commute.
Suppose that our Hermitian operators A and B here share the same complete set, psi n,
of eigenfunctions. And they will have associated eigenvalues An for the case of the A operator
and Bn for the case of the B operator. Then A after B operating on psi i will be A operating
on Bi times psi i because this is the eigenvalue we get, Bi, by operating with B on psi i.
Well, we can move this number around if we want. We don't really need to. A operating
on this vector here, which is just some vector proportional to this eigenvector psi i also
of the operator A just gives us another factor Ai in front here. So A after B operating on
psi i is Ai times Bi times psi i. And similarly, we can do this argument the other way around.
B after A operating on psi i is the same thing as B operating on the number Ai times psi
i. Of course, it doesn't matter what order we put the numbers in, and B operating on
some number times psi i because psi i is an eigenvector of B just gives us Bi times that
same vector.
Hence, for any function f, which we can expand therefore, in this complete set of eigenfunctions,
psi n-- so here is our expansion with expansion coefficients ci-- for that function, we have
that A after B operating on f is the sum over all the ci's of A after B operating on psi
i. So we know that's just Ai times Bi times psi i. And similarly, that's just the same
thing as Bi times Ai times psi i everywhere in this sum here because numbers commute.
And we know that that's the result of B after A operating on f. We can similarly check that
out,
Since we've proved this for an arbitrary function, that A after B operating on f is equal to
B after A operating on f, then we've proved that the operators commute. Hence, we've proved
our statement that operators that share the same set of eigenfunctions commute.
So now we have proved our two statements, operators that commute share the same set
of eigenfunctions, and operators that share the same set of eigenfunctions commute. This
equivalence has an important quantum mechanical consequence. Suppose the commuting operators
represent different measurable quantities. An example of such a situation is the case
of a free particle, that is, one for which the potential is constant everywhere.
In this case, the energy operator, that is the Hamiltonian, and the momentum operator,
have the same eigenfunctions, the plane waves. And the operators for energy and for momentum
commute with one another. In this case, if the particle is in an energy eigenstate, then
it's also in a momentum. eigenstate, and the particle, in this case, can simultaneously
have both a well-defined energy and a well-defined momentum.
We can measure both of these quantities and get perfectly well-defined values for both.
But what happens when the operators do not commute? We will look at this in the next
section, and it has profound consequences in quantum mechanics.