So far, we've just introduced unitary operators by proving that they don't change the length
of a vector. So we know what they don't do, but what do they do? Unitary operators do
two things for us. First, they allow us to change coordinate systems, or more generally,
what we would call representations.
We could have written out a vector representing some quantum mechanical state using, say,
an energy eigenfunction basis. Then we might decide that instead we wanted to represent
it using some different basis. We could then use a unitary operator to change the vector
from one basis, one coordinate system, to another.
In ordinary geometrical space, a unitary transformation, or a unitary operator, can change this from
one set of coordinate axes to another. For example, by rotating them. The second thing
that unitary operators do for us in quantum mechanics, is generally, allow us to change
the state of the quantum mechanical system.
The state of the system, presumably, remains normalized as we do so, so the operator that
does this change must preserve this normalization, and hence, it's a unitary operator. The operator
that gives us a time evolution of a quantum mechanical system is also a unitary operator,
for example. So let's look at how this mathematics works.
So let's look at this unitary operator that is going to change the representation of some
vector. So we suppose we have a vector, or a function, and we're going to call that f
old here. And it's represented on some basis, psi n, and when we do that we get a set of
expansion coefficients, c1, c2, and c3, and that will be a column vector, as usual, for
a ket vector. These numbers are just the projections of this vector, f old, onto these orthogonal
coordinate axes in the vector space. And those coordinate axes are labeled with these kets,
psi 1, psi 2, psi 3.
Suppose then, we want to represent this vector on some new set of orthogonal axes. And we'll
label these with another Greek letter, phi. So this is phi 1, phi 2, phi 3. These are
orthogonal axes, and these are the unit vectors, as usual, on those axes. Changing the axes,
which is equivalent to changing the basis set of functions we're going to use, does
not change the vector we're representing.
We're merely changing the coordinate axes, if you like. We're not changing the vector.
But it does change the column of numbers we're going to use to represent the vector. So it's
the same vector, f old, we started by calling it, but we're representing it on this basis,
the phi basis, instead of the psi basis.
For example, suppose the original vector, f old, just happened to be, actually, the
first basis vector in the old basis, psi 1. We could always have chosen that. It might
seem odd to do that, but we've got good reasons for it. Then in this new representation we're
going to choose with the phi vectors as the basis, the elements in the column of our numbers
would be the projections of this vector, psi 1, on the various new coordinate axes, each
of which is simply this number, the inner product of phi m with psi 1.
So for the m-th new coordinate axis, this is the number that gives us the projection
onto that axis, phi m. So under this coordinate transformation then, or this change of basis,
what used to be a vector that was 1, 0, 0, and so on, because this was our f old, was
psi 1, is now going to turn into a vector with the following numbers in it-- the following
expansion coefficients, if you like. Simply these projections of psi 1 onto each of these
new coordinate axes.
We could do similar transformations for each different basis vector in our old coordinate
system. And we get the correct transformation if we define a complete matrix made up from
these vectors we constructed before for each of these. And the matrix elements in here
then are simply phi i inner producted with psi j for the ij-th matrix element.
So that's just following the same logic we just took, but going through each different
old basis vector and expressing it in the new ones. And hence, with that, we can define
our new column of numbers to represent any arbitrary vector here. We started out with
some specific f old. We're going to get an f new, which will be a new column of numbers.
So how we do that is whatever was the old vector, we operate on it with this unitary
transform, and we get the new one. And we saw explicitly that that happened for each
one of the basis functions of the old system being this vector here. And we're just adding
up all of those to get the new vector over here. So this is how we transform from the
vector expressed in the old coordinate system, to the vector expressed in the new one. We
use this unitary transformation with these numbers, as the matrix elements, in the unitary
matrix.
Note incidentally, that here, f old and f new, are the same vector in our vector space.
If you like, in a geometrical analogy, these two vectors are pointing in the same direction
under the same length. They are the same vector. Only the representation, the coordinate axes,
and consequently, the column of numbers we're going to use, has changed. Not the vector
itself.
Now we can prove that this operator we've just constructed, U, is a unitary operator.
So we'll write the matrix multiplication in its summation form. So the matrix multiplication
of U dagger, that's a Hermitian adjoint of our unitary operation U, times U, would be
this product. And we're going to take the ij-th element of that.
Well, if we write that out in the summation form, for working out matrix multiplications,
then that just corresponds to the sum over m of u mi star u mj. This is the im-th element
of U dagger, but the im-th element of U dagger is the complex conjugate of the mi-th element
of u. That's why this is this element. Of course, we can work each of these out.
We know that u mj was just phi m, psi j, and u mi was just phi m, psi i, so u mi star is
just the complex conjugate of this number. Now, the complex conjugate of an inner product
is the same thing as the Hermitian adjoint of an inner product, because an inner product
is just a complex number. That's a one by one matrix.
And for a one by one matrix, the complex conjugate and the Hermitian adjoint are the same thing.
Also, we know, in general, that if we take an inner product and swap it around into the
other direction here, we take the complex conjugate when we do that. Anyway, whichever
way you want to look at it, this, with the complex conjugate, turns into this. Now we
notice that buried in here is actually an identity operator.
This is psi i out here. This is psi j out here. So there's nothing of these two that
sums over m, so we can move that summation over m inside here. And that's what we've
done in this next line. And this, of course, we recognize is just an identity operator,
because this set of phi m's is presumably complete. An identity operator does nothing,
so we can take it out.
So what we're looking at is the inner product of psi i and psi j, and, of course, that's
just the Kronecker delta, because these are orthogonal, actually, orthonormal functions.
So that means that since we get this for every single one of the elements in this product
here, what we have, actually, is a diagonal matrix with one down the diagonal. And that
just means that the product of U dagger times U is equal to the identity matrix. So that
means that U is unitary, because its Hermitian transpose, the U dagger, is behaving as its
inverse, and that's the definition of a unitary matrix.
Hence, any change in basis can be implemented with a unitary operator. We can also say that
any such change in representation to a new orthonormal basis is just a unitary transform.
Note, incidentally, that it doesn't matter which way around we do this multiplication,
U U dagger is the same thing as the Hermitian adjoint of U dagger U, which is, therefore,
the Hermitian adjoint of the identity operator, which is just the identity operator. So the
mathematical order in this multiplication makes no difference.
Now remember, that we concluded above, that a unitary transform does not change any inner
product. We can now, therefore, also conclude that a transformation to a new orthonormal
basis does not change any inner product. Again, this is what we would have expected from thinking
about the inner product being like a vector dot product of two geometrical vectors.
Of course, such an inner product does not depend on the coordinate axes-- only on the
directions and lengths of the vectors themselves. If a unitary operator can change a vector
from being represented on one coordinate system to another, can it do the same for operators?
Remember, an operator, when written as a matrix, has matrix elements that depend on the basis
we used.
If we change to a new basis, we will obviously, then, have to change the matrix elements.
Can the same unitary matrix that we used to change the representation of vectors-- to
change them from a new coordinate system, for example,-- can that also be used to transform
other operators to new coordinate systems without us having to recalculate all the matrix
elements again?
The answer, of course, is that it can. If we know all the matrix elements on one basis,
we will be able to use the same unitary matrix, the one that we used to change the vectors
to a new basis, also to change the operators to the new basis without recalculating all
the matrix elements. Let's see how this works.
Consider a number such as the bra vector g, some arbitrary function, and an operator A,
and the ket vector f, and the result of this operation should not depend on the coordinate
system. After all, this is a vector. We operate on it to change its length and its direction
as it were, and then we take the inner product of that new vector with this one.
It should not depend what basis we're using to represent any of these. This number should
be the same number if these are the same vectors and this is the same operator, the operator
that does the same thing to a given vector. So the result of this in some old coordinate
system should be the same as in the new coordinate system.
So, therefore, however we get to this answer here, in the new coordinate system, should
be the same as the answer in the old coordinate system. Note that the subscripts, old and
new, refer to the representations, not to the vectors or the operators themselves. We're
saying the vectors are really the same vectors, and the operator is really the same operator,
it's just the way we're writing them down that is different between this expression
and this expression. Only the numbers that represent these vectors and this operator
have changed. Not the vectors themselves and not the operator itself.
Well, with our unitary operator U to go from old to new systems for vectors, we figured
that out, we can write the following. We can take a bra vector for g new. We can turn it
into a ket vector with a Hermitian adjoint. And then, we know how to write down that ket
vector, g new, in terms of the old version of that ket vector. That's just U operating
on g old.
And similarly, the new f is just U operating on the old f, in terms of the columns of numbers.
Well, having written this down this way, we can take the Hermitian adjoint of this product,
which means flipping it around, so that gives us a bra vector, g old, and U dagger, from
taking the Hermitian adjoint of this product. Now we believe that this new version should
be the same number as this old version.
So, therefore, we believe that this here must actually be the same as that there. Hence,
we identify that this U dagger, A new U, must be A old. Or we can change that around. We
can pre-multiply by U, and we can multiply by U dagger on the other side here on this
expression, and similarly, on this one.
So on this expression here, the U would give us U U dagger, and the U dagger over here
would give us U U dagger. And, of course, U U dagger is just the identity operator.
So this gives us A new. So simply rewriting that then, the operator on the new coordinate
system is related to the operator on the old coordinate system in the following way. Incidentally,
we can understand this.
So now we're talking about an operator in the new coordinate system. Therefore, if we're
coming along with a vector in the new coordinate system, and we're multiplying by the U dagger
here, what this U dagger is doing is it's taking our vector in the new coordinate system
and turning it into one in the old coordinate system.
Then we operate with the operator in the old coordinate system to get a vector in the old
coordinate system, and then we use U to transform from the old coordinate system back to the
new coordinate system. So that's what's going on inside here. And, of course, that's just
the same thing as operating with A in the new coordinate system. So this is how we transform
an operator from an old coordinate system to a new one.
We've just been looking at unitary operators that change the coordinate system, but not
the actual vectors, or the operators. So here is our vector, here is our coordinate system,
and we've been saying we use a unitary operator to change the coordinate system, but the vector
itself remains the same.
So we've been using these unitary transformations to change the way we're writing down these
vectors or operators. But they're still the same vectors, and the operators still do the
same things to the vectors, as they did before, rotating the vectors and stretching them essentially.
Remember, that what an operator does to a vector is it turns it around and possibly
stretches it or compresses it.
And, of course, in quantum mechanics, we have to remember we have complex numbers involved
with this. As we said before, operators that change the quantum mechanical state are also
unitary. Why such operators arise in quantum mechanics is simple. If we're working, for
example, with a single particle, then the sum of all of the occupation probabilities
of all the possible states is unity.
It's important to understand that such operators are not changing the basis set. They're actually
changing the quantum mechanical state of the system. And hence, they're changing the vector's
orientation in space. So operators that are changing the quantum mechanical state are
rotating this vector.
They're not changing the length of it, because that's staying the same, but they're rotating
it around in some way to say we are in a different quantum mechanical state, but we're on the
same coordinate system. As a minor mathematical confusion, there's no difference in the notation
we use when we're using a unitary operator to change coordinate systems and when we are
using it to change the physical state of the system.
As far as the mathematics is concerned, these are both just unitary transformations. However,
remember, that using a unitary operator to change a coordinate system, or basis, is a
purely mathematical operation. There's no change in the physical state. So here's our
physical state. We're rotating the coordinate system, but we're not changing the physical
state with that kind of unit to the operation. Using a unitary operator to change the quantum
mechanical state of the system is different. It's rotating the vector in Hilbert space
while leaving the coordinate axes unchanged.
So in thinking about a unitary operator that changes the state vector, for example, if
our quantum mechanical state psi here, is expanded on some basis psi n, so our state
psi is a sum over n of some expansion coefficients a n times psi n, then, of course, the sum
of the squares of these expansion coefficients is going to be 1, because our quantum mechanical
state, psi, was presumably normalized.
And if the particle is to be conserved, as we go forward, then this sum of the modulus
squared of the expansion coefficients should not change. It should be retained, as the
quantum mechanical system evolves in time. That is really the length of this vector,
should be retained. This here is just the square, of course, of the vector length. It's
bra psi times ket psi, if you like. Hence, a unitary operator, which conserves length,
will describe changes in the quantum mechanical state that conserve the particle. They conserve
the probabilities all adding up to one.