To look at some of the major approximation methods we use for time independent problems
in quantum mechanics, we're going to use an example problem. Specifically, we're going
to look at an electron inside a potential well with infinitely high barriers as usual,
but with an applied electric field. This problem is complicated enough to show what happens
with various different models, but simple enough that we can conveniently work with
it. It's also a problem that has exact analytic solutions, even if they are slightly obscure,
so we can, if we want, compare with an exact answer.
Incidentally, this particular problem turns out to be of substantial practical interest.
It's at the core of devices called quantum well electroabsorption modulators. These are
devices made from layered semiconductor structures containing individual layers of about 10 nanometers
thickness. When we apply a voltage to these structures, we can shift the quantum mechanical
levels around and significantly change how much light this structure will absorb at a
given light wavelength or frequency. Such devices are actually one of the major ways
that we impose signals on the light beams we use for all of our internet connections
over optical fibers.
Before trying out our various methods, then, we need to set up this particular problem
in a convenient form, so we'll start by doing that next. So we're going to consider an electron
in a potential well with infinitely high walls as usual. It will have a thickness, Lz, and
the usual notation we have for the energy of the first confined state in that well would
be E1 infinity, the infinity indicating we've got infinitely high walls, as usual. We'll
be using that as an energy unit later on, and we'll be using this thickness as a distance
unit later on.
And then we're going to apply an electric field to it. We're going to put a field on
that is pointing in this direction with a magnitude, capital E. And that will give a
change in potential energy from one side to the other of the well of little e, the electronic
charge, the magnitude of it, times the value of the field times the thickness, Lz. So as
we go from one side of this well to another, an electron would have an energy that increased
by this amount.
So formally, the energy of an electron in an electric field, capital E here, simply
increases linearly with distance. A positive electric field in the positive z direction
pushes the electron in the negative z direction-- it's pushing it downhill in the negative z
direction-- with a force of magnitude the electronic charge times the magnitude of the
field.
So the potential energy of an electron in a field pointing in the positive z direction
is one that increases in the positive z direction because the force is trying to push it in
the other direction. And the form of this potential energy as a function of position
z is the electronic charge times the field-- that's the force-- times the distance-- that's
z.
Now, in this problem, we're going to choose the potential to be zero in the middle of
the well. Hence, within the well, the potential energy is little e, the electronic charge,
times the magnitude of the field times the position relative to the center of the well
so that when z is equal to Lz over 2, that is, in the middle of the well, the potential
energy would be zero. That's just a convenient choice for us. It doesn't actually matter
what we choose, but we'll choose this one for convenience.
So the Hamiltonian becomes, as usual, our kinetic energy term here for this one dimensional
problem, and then here explicitly is our potential energy term. We can usefully set this problem
up in dimensionless units. A convenient unit of energy is, rather obviously, the energy
of the confinement of the first state in the original infinitely deep well, so E1 infinity.
And in those units, the eigenenergy of the nth state of the problem will be eta n in
dimensionless form-- that's the actual energy of the nth state in our real problem, including
the field-- divided by E1 infinity, our unit of energy.
A convenient unit of field to use here, some field E0, is one that would give one energy
unit of potential change from one side of the well to the other. So that would be a
field unit that corresponds to that confinement energy of the first level in the well divided
by the electronic charge, e, times the width of the well, Lz. So the dimensionless field,
then, will be some number, f, which is the actual field divided by this field unit here.
And obviously, a convenient distance unit in this problem is the thickness, Lz, of the
well. So the dimensionless distance will be xi here, which is z over Lz.
From the original Hamiltonian, which we wrote out in this form, dividing by this energy
unit, E1 infinity, and using dimensionless units gives this form of the Hamiltonian,
now a dimensionless form, 1 over pi squared, d2 by d xi squared plus f times xi minus 1/2
here. And the time independent Schroedinger equation in these dimensionless units would
simply be H operating on phi of xi is equal to eta, our eigenenergy we hope to calculate,
times phi of xi.
For the unperturbed problem-- that is, the one before we apply the field to it-- we can
write this so-called unperturbed Hamiltonian within the well, then, as the usual simple
Hamiltonian with a potential of zero. There's no potential energy out here. We've chosen
it to be zero in the unperturbed situation when we're within the well.
And we know the solutions to this problem, and writing them in this normalized form,
we would have our corresponding Schroedinger equation with the unperturbed energies written
as epsilon n, and then the wave functions of this unperturbed problem in these dimensionless
units would simply be psi n of xi equals root 2 times sine of n pi xi So just the dimensionless
form of the usual solutions of the infinitely deep well problem.