Now, we've separated the equations for the internal states of the hydrogen atom into
two parts. One is the angular part we've already solved with the solutions that are the spherical
harmonic functions. These make up the angular aspects of the orbitals that are the wavefunction
solutions of the hydrogen atom problem.
The second part is the radial equation, which will give us the behavior as a function of
distance from the center of the atom. This equation can be solved by some straightforward,
though rather mathematical, techniques. The solutions to this equation are well known
and well understood. And it's easy to check that they work.
Though the technique that allows us to construct these solutions, a method called series solution
of differential equations, is quite a useful method, it's not particularly likely that
you will come across many other problems that require you to use them. So here, we're largely
going to avoid that mathematical detail of how we get to those solutions. Instead, we
will basically state what the solutions are and concentrate more on trying to understand
what they mean in a physical sense.
So now, let's look at these radial equation solutions. Remember, we had used a separation
of the hydrogen atom wavefunction into radial and angular parts for our internal states.
And we had rewritten the radial part using this alternative way. And we had, therefore,
obtained this radial equation here. And we know already, from the solutions of the spherical
harmonic parts, that l is 0 or some positive integer.
Well, now, we're going to choose to write our energies in the following form-- minus
the Rydberg divided by n squared, where for the moment, n is just an arbitrary real number.
Of course, in the end, we're going to show it's an integer. But for the moment, it's
just an arbitrary real number.
So there's nothing to stop us from choosing to write our energies in this form here. We
are presuming that this energy is actually going to be a negative number. We'll define
a new distance unit for the purposes of our algebra for the moment. A distance unit s
is equal to alpha times r, where this alpha parameter is given by this formula here.
And again, because EH is going to be a negative number, we think it's all right to have this
minus sign in here. This alpha should still be a real number. So this is just for algebraic
convenience.
Therefore, with those slight changes, we get this equation. This is exactly the same equation
as we had before, but because of our minor changes of units, it looks a little simpler.
Then we write, let's presume, that this chi of s function is s to the little l plus 1
times some function capital L of s times e to the minus s over 2.
Now incidentally, this capital L here is nothing to do with the angular momentum operator.
It's just because of the particular name we're going to end up with for these functions that
we also are using the letter capital L here. But don't confuse this with any solutions
of the angular momentum equation. This is a standard notation, though, for the functions
we are about to come up with.
So this is just some function, L of s. And remember, s is really just the radius here
in a slightly different dimensional form. So we've really got radius to the power l
plus 1, some function of the radius, and e to the minus something proportional to radius
over 2.
So with that presumption substituting in here, we get this equation. So that's merely substituting
this into the equation at the top here. A little bit of algebra will get this equation
here.
Now, that equation can be solved by a technique known as series solution of differential equations.
And basically, what one does is propose that there's some power series in this variable
s, and then substitute that in here for this function l and see what happens.
And the key thing we have to do is find a way of setting up that power series so that
it does not go on forever. We want the power series to terminate at some finite power of
the variable s. Otherwise, the function is not normalizable. So the power series will
go on forever, unless we satisfy some termination condition.
We need it not to go on forever, because otherwise, the function would grow arbitrarily, and it
wouldn't be normalizable. So there are criteria we come up with, now, when we construct this
power series solution for this equation so that the power series will terminate at some
finite power of s.
And that, in turn, requires that this n is an integer, and also that it's greater than
or equal to l plus 1. So this is actually relatively straightforward to work out, but
it takes a bunch of algebra to do it. If you propose a power series for s, put it in here.
And if you want that power series to stop at some point, then you will need to have
n as an integer. And it will need to be greater than l plus 1.
So the normalizable solutions of this equation turn out to be these finite power series.
They're known as associated Laguerre polynomials. And they have this form.
Now, on the face of it, this looks rather complicated. But realize what it is. It's
a sum over a bunch of powers of s. So we're going from s to the power 0-- q equals 0--
with some factor in front of it, all the way up to the term s to the power n minus l minus
1. So it's a polynomial of degree n minus l minus 1.
And these are the factors out front. They're straightforward to work. We just evaluate
these factorials. So from this expression here, you could write down, for any particular
values of n and l, exactly what this polynomial is. And it would be some polynomial that went
up to the highest power, s to the power n minus l minus 1. So from this formula, you
can write down the associated Laguerre polynomials if you want to.
Or equivalently, in the notation in which the Laguerre polynomials themselves might
actually be written in a mathematics book, we could write it like this. But these are
actually exactly the same expressions, just with a slightly different notation.
So now, we can work back to construct our whole solution. We've actually now solved
the whole problem. In our definition here, these l functions were the associated Laguerre
polynomials. So we put those in.
And we note that s we had defined was this particular variable here. So we can work backwards.
We knew what our radial solution was. And if we work backwards to get what this r is,
then this is what the r looks like. And we've not put in a normalization factor here yet,
but this is basically what the capital R function looks like now.
An equivalently, since r and s are just proportional to one another. This is really a function
proportional to s to the power l times all of this on the right.
We can formally now normalize these. So we could formally put in a normalization coefficient
so that our r function was 1 over A times all of this here. The full normalization integral
of this wavefunction would be this expression here. Everything on the right would have to
integrate up to give us 1. That is, the modulus square of the wavefunction indicated over
all space would have to give us 1.
Because we are working in spherical polar coordinates, the volume element that we end
up working with in this equation is this r squared sine theta d theta d phi dr. But that's
just coming from the spherical polar coordinates.
But we've already normalized the spherical harmonics, so we don't have to do that again.
So we're left with the radial normalization. And the integral that we would be left with
would be this one here.
We could show, with a little bit of effort but just relatively standard mathematics,
that the integral of everything inside this expression would just come to these factorials
on the right hand side. So the normalized radial wavefunction would become this expression--
so basically, r to the power l, a Laguerre polynomial of this type, and an e to the minus
r over n times the Bohr radius.
We write these wavefunctions now using the Bohr radius, a nought, as our unit of radial
distance. So we've got a dimensionless radial distance just for convenience. So we use a
new coordinate, rho equals r over the Bohr radius.
And we introduce some subscripts here. Specifically, now, we give names to these. n is the principle
quantum number. And remember, we deduced it had to be an integer. And it had to be greater
than or equal to l plus 1. And l is our angular momentum quantum number, the same one we had
before from solving the angular momentum problem for the l squared operator. And we use these
to index the various functions, now, that we can write out.
So here are some of the functions. Explicitly, then, for n equals 1, the principle quantum
number equal to 1, and the angular momentum quantum number, therefore, has to be l equals
0, because n has to be greater than or equal to l plus 1. So if n is 1, l has to be 0.
And we get this function, which formally is in this form.
So it basically is a function that simply falls off exponentially with distance, and
that falls off with an exponential decay length the Bohr radius. Remember that rho is just
the actual physical distance r divided by the Bohr radius. So here it is. This is the
function in radius that corresponds to the n equals 1 l equals 0 state.
If we go on to look at the n equals 2 states, then here they are plotted up. And we'll show
what they actually are. For the l equals 0 state with n equals 2, then we have this red
function here. So it's basically 2 minus the radius in Bohr units times e to the minus
the radius in Bohr units, but now, divided by 2.
So this function goes out further. The exponential decay is slower now that we've gone to higher
n. For the n equals 1, it was just e to the minus rho. Now, it's e to the minus rho over
2. So the overall exponential decay of this function is slower.
And there's also a 2 minus rho multiplying it. That means that this function goes through
a 0 here at rho equals 2-- at 2 Bohr radii away from the center.
For the l equals 1 radial function, it's this blue curve here. Note that now, this function
is 0 at the origin because there's a simple rho out front multiplying it. It falls off,
still, at large distances with the same exponential factor, which is e to the minus the radius
in Bohr radii units divided by 2-- so the same kind of exponential decay. But this function
never goes through 0. It may be 0 at the middle, but it never goes through the axis.
For principal quantum number n equals 3, here are the various radial solutions-- for l equals
0, the red solution. Then the function is this quadratic here times the exponential
of minus rho over 3. So this is falling off even slower than the n equals 1 and n equals
2 states.
And this quadratic here has got two 0's. So the red curve goes through the axis twice.
For l equals 1, the blue curve, we have rho times 4 minus 2/3 rho. So this goes to 0 at
the origin here, at 0 radius. It has another 0 when this factor equals 0. And it also falls
off with this exponential minus rho over 3 now.
And for l equals 2, we have the orange curve. And that is rho squared times the exponential
of minus rho over 3. So it also starts at 0 here, grows, and then decays with the same
exponential.
We can look at the probability densities that we can calculate here. And I've plotted on
this particular picture, first of all, the n equals 1, l equals 0, m equals zero function.
And this is the cross section taken at y equals 0 in xyz space. So you're looking at the xz-plane
at y equals 0, cutting through the middle of the hydrogen atom.
This is known in the standard nomenclature as a 1s state. So the 1 is the n quantum number.
And the s refers to the l quantum number. Of course, s corresponds to l equals 0. And
in this case, m has to be 0, because remember that m has to run from minus l to plus l as
an integer.
For comparison with some later pictures, I've also plotted here this 1s orbital on the logarithmic
intensity scale. This makes it a little easier to see what happens at larger distances. But
of course, it's not accurate. This is the accurate one. But this will let us see later
on some comparisons.
Here's the 2s state. On this scale, you barely notice any difference compared to the 1s state.
But it is, in fact, significantly different. This is n equals 2, l equals 0. And to see
that, we should look at the logarithmic intensity scale, because then you see here's the radial
0 in that function. And the function then goes through 0 and grows in magnitude, again,
in probability density and then decays off.
So this is what it actually looks like in a linear scale. But if we look on the logarithmic
scale, we can see what's going on at these large distances.
The 2p state is exactly like what you would think for p states of atoms. So it's got two
lobes, top and bottom. But we now have the radial dependence, as well, here. So it falls
off exponentially with the radius. And in the wavefunction itself, this would be a positive
lobe and this would be a negative lobe.
But of course, we're looking at the probability density here. And here, we see a nodal circle
that has pinched off the wavefunction.
If we look at the other m values, all that happens is that we rotate this to the other
two coordinate axes. So it's not really a different function. It's just in a different
axis.
The 3s state, again, on this linear scale, doesn't really show very much. But if we put
it on the logarithmic intensity scale, we can see what's going on. We get two radial
0's here, as we would expect for that n equals 3, l equals zero function.
And then if we look at the 3p state-- so that's l equals 1-- again, the angular function has
got a nodal circle that pinches off the wavefunction here. But because we have n equals 3 and l
equals 1, we have to have another radial 0. And here's the radial 0, round here.
And on a logarithmic intensity scale, we can just see slightly clearer what's going on.
Again, we have pinching off in the middle. And we still have another radial 0. So this
pinch off in the middle is from the l equals 1. And we have another radial 0 here.
The other m values, minus 1 and plus 1, again, just look the same, but on the other coordinate
directions. Here's the 3d state. Remember, this l equals 2, m equals 0 state has got
no nodal circles going through the poles. So it has two nodal circles pinching in here
in these two directions.
Because n equals 3, l equals 2, there's no other 0 in the radial direction. The necessary
0's are shown by these behaviors, not by radial behaviors. So they're 0's in angular behavior.
And here's another 3d function, this time with l equals 2. And this has got two nodal
circles, one going through the poles and one going around the equator. And there's no need
for any further 0's in the radial direction. n equals 3, but we have our two 0's from the
angular functions-- these nodal circles pinching off the wavefunction. And we could go on like
this to higher n's. But we will stop here at this point.
So let's just summarize the behavior of the complete hydrogen solutions, then, that we've
been looking at. The overall size of the wavefunctions, first of all, becomes larger with larger n.
We've seen that. It falls off as minus rho over n, essentially. And the number of 0's
in the wavefunction overall is really n minus 1. It's the principle quantum number minus
1.
These can be in the radial functions. But if we have l greater than 0, then we start
to get fewer 0's in the radial functions, and we get them in the angular functions instead.
And the spherical harmonics, remember, have l nodal circles.
Just a minor point here-- you might think, well, these radial functions happen to have
additional 0's at r equals 0, once l gets greater than or equal to 1. But this particular
0 is already counted, because every time l is greater than or equal to 1, there's at
least one nodal circle in the spherical harmonic. And that pinches off the wavefunction, so
it already takes care of this 0 at r equals 0.
So overall, the radial wavefunctions have n minus l minus 1 0's. And the overall wavefunctions
really have n minus 1 0's.
Just to summarize on these quantum numbers, now, for the so-called principal quantum numbers,
we said it starts at 1 and goes up in integer increments. The l quantum number has to be
less than or equal to n minus 1, another way of stating the same as we said before.
We already deduced that l has to be positive or 0 integer. And we know the eigenenergies.
We actually wrote down the formula before for given possible values of n, the eigenenergies
are minus the Rydberg over n squared.
Note, incidentally, that the energy does not depend at all on the l or m quantum numbers.
It only depends on the n quantum number.