[MUSIC PLAYING] In quantum mechanics, as in classical mechanics, there are actually relatively
few problems that we can solve exactly. In quantum mechanics, we can look at the free
particle, the particle in a box, the harmonic oscillator, the hydrogen atom, and a few others.
Beyond such relatively ideal and simple problems, most others require that we take some approach,
either with approximations or with purely numerical techniques that is not just an analytic
one.
In quantum mechanics, it's useful and important to look at approximation methods for two reasons.
First, of course, such methods mean we may be able to calculate some useful results without
too much difficulty. Secondly, though, in quantum mechanics, we can use approximation
methods to help us conceptually understand many situations quantum mechanically. Often,
approximation methods allow us to think of effects and processes in a meaningful way.
For example, the interaction of ordinary light that we see around us with the materials that
we see around us is, in one sense, a relatively weak interaction. The light does not really
perturb the material very much. Only if we shine very strong laser light at materials
does the light have much substantial effect on the material itself.
As a result of this relative weakness of the interaction between materials and everyday
light, it will turn out that we can use one particular kind of so-called perturbation
theory, a kind of approximate model based on the idea that we're only making very small
changes. We'll be able to use that approach to model such interactions quite conveniently
and simply to a very high degree of accuracy.
Such a model enables us to understand, for example, the colors of materials if we understand
the basic quantum mechanics of the materials themselves. And gives us relatively simple
formulas to work with. We'll come back to that particular kind of model, which is an
example of a so-called time-dependent perturbation theory, in a few sections.
We're going to start here, first by looking at problems where the system is not really
changing in time, but we are doing something specific to it. A good example is how an applied
electric field, a voltage of some kind, changes the properties of some material or structure.
We can imagine increasingly applied voltage and watching how our material or structure
changes as a result. For example, the effect of an applied electric field on an atom is
to change the precise frequencies of its atomic absorption or emission lines, something we
know as the so-called Stark effect. Such effects are often handled quite well by approximation
theories. Again, because the perturbations we can make on an atom are relatively small
with the kinds of fields that we can actually apply. Our fields are much smaller than the
fields in, say, the atom itself in that case.
Such an effect can be handled quite effectively by time independent perturbation theory, which
is in the end, a fairly simple theory of successive approximations. And we will look at that approach
as a simple version for such a problem.
So for a problem such as applying an electric field, there are several other approximate
techniques and approaches we could take, some of which, such as the use of finite matrices
for example, conveniently enable us to model quite strong perturbations of systems. Other
techniques, such as the variational method and the tight binding method can give us significant
physical insight into the behavior of some quantum mechanical systems, as well as giving
us useful approximate answers.
So here, we're going to introduce various of these techniques, techniques that are part
of the everyday toolkit of any good quantum mechanic.