To analyze more complicated systems, like molecules and crystalline materials, we need
to come up with some simple, approximate models that allow us to understand what is going
on. Some of these models allow quite accurate calculations of such structures and materials,
though we're not going to address such methods at the moment.
We're going to look, however, at a method that, though not necessarily a very accurate
way to look at real problems, gives us quite a lot of insight. An approach called the tight-binding
method. This method says essentially, that when we're looking at one or more usually
identical systems, such as, say, atoms in a solid, or possibly in a molecule, we could
start out by trying to understand these systems presuming that the electrons in one atom or
unit are relatively strongly bound within that unit,
and only weakly couple over to the next one. While that may not be quite true in the real
material or structure, such a model is quite simple to construct in many cases and can
give us some quite useful insights. The insights we can get from this model are also relatively,
broadly useful.
A model like this can tell us quite generally what happens as we start to couple two identical
systems, for example, by bringing them progressively closer. Here we're going to look at a tight-binding
model for possibly the simplest problem we might address that way-- the problem of two
identical, but coupled wells.
This is, incidentally, a problem we could also solve relatively exactly, at least numerically,
without very great difficulty. The reason for using the tight-binding model is that
it gives us insight into what is going on, insight that turns out to remain useful even
as we look at more sophisticated or exact descriptions of such a system.
So let's see how we put this model together and what it tells us about the electron states
in such a system-- a pair of potential wells with a moderately, but not entirely, impenetrable
barrier between them. So we're formerly going to set up a problem of coupled potential wells.
So we're going to consider two identical potential wells separated by some finite barrier.
So here we have them. Here's one potential well here. Here's another potential well.
And here's the barrier in between. And we presume that these barriers on either side
go on forever. And solid state physicists would call the kind of approach we're going
to use here something called tight-binding--
a tight-binding calculation. So we imagine these two separate, what we'll call, unperturbed
potential wells. If we had the left potential well on its own, so just this well, but no
other one here, and we could have a potential for that. We'd call it V left of z. Well,
we would be able to solve this kind of problem.
We'd have our first wavefunction solution here. We could call that psi left of z. And
it would have some energy, E1. And we know how to solve that problem. We've solved that
one already. Similarly, we could consider just the right potential on its own. So just
this potential well here with no potential well on the left.
And we would call the potential here V right of z. And we would similarly be able to solve
for this wavefunction, psi right of z, which is just the same as the one we solved for
psi left of z, but shifted over to the right. And, of course, it would have the same eigenenergy,
E1. Now our actual potential, of course, is this one with the two wells in it.
And we're calling this V of z. This entire potential here. And we could call this a coupled
potential well. Note incidentally, we're going to choose our energy origin at the top here.
Of course, we can always choose this energy origin wherever we wish. And it's just going
to make our algebra a little simpler here.
If we choose the 0 here, so this would be some negative energy, and this would be some
negative energy. We can always do that. It's always a choice we can make. So now, because
of that, we can say that this potential, V of z, is actually simply the sum of V left
of z and V right of z.
So just adding together this potential, and this potential, gives us this one. So that's
just an algebraic convenience. It wouldn't matter what we chose here, but you can see,
obviously, this makes our algebra a little simpler. So with this choice of energy origin,
the Hamiltonian for the system simply becomes our usual kinetic energy term, and the sum
of these two potentials, the left and the right.
So now what we're going to do really, is we're going to think about solving this problem
using a finite basis subset model, if you like. And in this case, what we're going to
do is we're going to choose these wavefunctions in the isolated wells as our basis. So psi
left of z and psi right the z.
So we're going to choose a basis with just these two functions in it hoping that that's
going to be good enough for our problem and solve just using these two. Now these two
functions are approximately orthogonal. If the barrier is reasonably thick. That is,
we're presuming that each wavefunction is relatively tightly confined within its own
well and with little leakage over into the adjacent well.
So we're saying this amount of wavefunction leakage we see into this barrier here is not
very much over here. So we think that probably, even in this coupled well problem, there's
not really very much leakage of this basis function as it were over to the left. And
similarly, there's not much leakage of this basis function over to the right.
Now, this is only an approximation, but we're going to take this approximation in this kind
of model. Hence, we're calling this the tight-binding model. These individual wavefunctions, we
regard as being very localized within their individual wells. Hence, the wavefunction
we're going to use can be written approximately in the form psi is equal to a times psi left
plus b times psi right.
This has to be the case if we're saying that these are really effectively our basis functions
that we're going to use in this problem. We can put this in vector form, of course. We
can use it in the same kind of way that we used the finite basis subset approximation
with matrices before.
So here we have our matrix form. We've got our coefficients, a and b, which are just
these ones here, and now we'll say, well, we are going to write our Hamiltonian now
as a matrix on this basis here. And writing it as an eigenequation, we have this matrix,
this operator, operating on the state is going to be equal to E times the state on this basis.
So in this matrix form then, we have, first of all, this matrix element H11. Well, that's
just psi left star times the operator times psi left. And because we're presuming the
barrier is relatively thick here, the amplitude of psi left is going to be approximately 0
inside the right hand well.
So this is the approximation we make here. So we're saying this basis function is approximately
0 inside this well. So this integrand here with psi left star here and psi left on the
right as well, is approximately 0 inside the right well, because we're presuming that this
wavefunction, psi left of z is approximately 0 inside the right well.
Hence, this term, psi star left of z times V right of z times psi left of z can be neglected.
The potential V right is 0 everywhere except inside the right hand well. But there we're
saying these wavefunctions are approximately 0. So this integral, we're going to neglect.
Hence, when we look at this H11 here, we lose the plus V right of z insight here.
We're just not going to have that. And, of course, then, this matrix element simply becomes
E1. This is just the evaluation of the Hamiltonian for this problem, the left hand problem, on
its own now. And we can argue similarly for H22, which is just associated with the other
wavefunction, with this one here.
Hence, both of these are simply equal to approximately E1. For the same reasons, that, for example,
either psi left of z is 0 in the right well, or that psi right of z is 0 in the left well,
then when integrating within either well, we can neglect all of the following integrations.
But only, of course, when integrating within either well.
So this one will be 0 within either well, because either V right is 0 or psi star left
is 0. Within either one of the wells, one or other of these conditions would be true,
at least approximately for this one. And similarly, in this case, either V left is 0 or psi right
is approximately 0. In one or other well, this will always be the case.
One or other of these will be approximately 0. And similarly, for these other terms here.
So we are, however, going to retain the interaction within this middle barrier here, where the
wavefunctions, although small, are presumed not to be negligible. So we're saying this
wavefunction isn't negligible, and this wavefunction isn't negligible, when they're within this
barrier.
But we are going to neglect contributions from the regions outside this middle barrier,
as we've just discussed. Because one or other basis wavefunction is approximately 0 there,
at least for these off diagonal terms in the Hamiltonian that we're looking at now. So
we will retain this result.
This is the integral within the barrier, and within the barrier, we're not presuming this
wavefunction is 0, psi star left, and we're not presuming this one is 0, psi right, and
we're not presuming that this Hamiltonian gives us 0 result. Now it is true that the
potential is 0 inside the barrier. But this derivative here is not, in general, going
to give us a 0 result.
As I said, inside the barrier, V of z is actually equal to 0. So this simplifies to the following
integral that we're going to be looking at. And this delta E is going to come up in our
matrix elements. Incidentally here, delta E happens to be a negative number. This is
not particularly important, but if you're checking through the algebra, you might get
confused if you don't realize that particular point.
And that's because the second derivative within the body are here, for example, of psi right
is greater than 0. So the second derivative of psi right is greater than 0 within the
barrier, because the gradient is actually increasing in that region. Well, with these
simplifications our Hamiltonian becomes really very simple, and our eigenequation, correspondingly,
also becomes very simple.
The diagonal elements, we already worked out, were basically E1, and all that's left, for
example, for H12 here is this one term delta E. Remember, H12 involved wavefunctions one
and two in calculating it, and the only place where at least one of them is not 0, is inside
the barrier.
Note in practice that this delta E is typically real, because we'll typically work with real
wavefunctions here, although we don't technically have too. But we've left the complex conjugate
in here for completeness. Well, we find the eigenvalues of this equation, fairly straightforwardly,
by setting the determinant of this matrix to 0, which is a standard technique.
And that is this quadratic equation, in this case here, has to be equal to 0. And that
gives us eigenvalues from the solutions of this quadratic, and they will be eigenvalues
E equal to E1 plus or minus the modulus of this quantity delta E. That's the result of
solving this equation, or equivalently solving this equation here.
And what that means is we're going to get two energy levels here separated by an amount
2 delta E. The magnitude of the separation is that amount. So within these approximations
here, the energy levels are split by the coupling between the wells. It's only the interaction
within the barrier that comes into this particular calculation here.
And these are split, in this model, symmetrically about the original single well energy. So
the single well energy would be exactly in the middle here between these two lines I've
drawn. So if we now take these eigenvalues that we've calculated, and we substitute them
back in here, that is we choose these eigenvalues, one or other of them, we choose them one by
one to figure this out, we then get linear equations that we can solve for a and b.
So solving for a and b gives us, after normalization, here's one of the solutions, psi a, I'm calling
it, is psi left minus psi right. So I've got something that's positive in the left here
and negative in the right. I divided by root 2 here to get this normalized. Of course,
the sign of this overall wavefunction doesn't matter.
I could equally have done it the other way up. And always, of course, with eigenfunctions,
we could multiply them by any unit complex number, and it wouldn't make any difference.
But we'll write this one in this form. And anyway, the key point is that these have got
opposite signs.
And the other one is this one down here where these two have the same signs. So psi left
plus psi right, and again, the root 2 on the bottom line for normalization. And again,
we could multiply this by any unit complex number and it's still an answer, but the key
point is these signs are the same in both sides in this particular wavefunction solution.
So here are our two eigenfunctions that we get out of this very simple model. The lower
energy state here is a symmetric linear combination of the single-well functions. It's this one
plus this one. The wavefunction has the same sign in both wells. The upper energy state
is associated with an anti-symmetric combination--
this one and minus this one. So minus this one here. Plus this one, but minus this one.
So we have the opposite sign in the two wells for the upper state. So we can also see that
we can no longer view these states as corresponding to an electron in the left well or an electron
in the right well.
In both of these states, the electron is equally in both wells. So that's a difference from
our original unperturbed, uncoupled problems. Here the electron is definitely in the left,
and here it was definitely on the right. But now, in the coupled problem, the electron,
in both of the states, is equally in each well.
This general form of wavefunctions, one symmetric and one anti-symmetric, is characteristic
of such a symmetric problem. And it's retained even as we perform more accurate calculations.
Bringing two identical systems together leads to a splitting of the degenerate eigenvalues
and a coupling of the states.
This is a very general phenomena in quantum mechanics. It occurs, for example, when we
bring atoms together to form a crystalline solid and leads to the formation of energy
bands of very closely spaced states, rather than the discrete separated energy levels
of the constituent atoms.
This calculation has features also found in molecular bonding. If we have one electron
to share between two potential wells, as we bring those two potential wells together,
two possible states emerge. One of which has lower energy than either of the states the
system previously had.
If we think of these potential wells as being analogous to atoms, we get lower energy in
this lowest state by bringing in the atoms closer together. We would have to add energy
to the electron if we were to try to pull the potential wells, or the atoms, apart.
Hence, this lowest state corresponds to a kind of chemically-bonded state.
Now, the actual theory of molecular bonding is much more complex than this, because it
has to account for multiple electrons in the system, and potentials that are not simply
square wells, and it also has many aspects to it beyond what we are considering here.
However, these symmetric and anti-symmetric solutions are sometimes called bonding and
anti-bonding states, respectively. We can certainly see that there can be states of
lower energy, as a result of bringing these two systems together-- these states of lower
energy than either of the separate systems possessed, thus energetically favoring this
kind of bonding state.