In our approach here with oscillating perturbations, we chose a system initially to be in a specific
energy eigenstate, the mth state which we called psi m. Now the application of the perturbation
has changed the state of the system. So now there's a probability that the system is in
some other state. We would like to know if we now make a measurement, for example, of
the energy after the perturbation is over, what's the probability that the system will
be found in some other state, say the jth state, which we might call psi j.
In the language we use then, we want to know what's the transition probability from state
m to state j. In this model then, the probability P j of finding the system in state psi j is,
of course, just the modulus squared of the expansion coefficient. And that's the first
order expansion coefficient we've calculated here. Remember, the zeroth order one was zero
because we started out in state m which we presume is different from state j.
So we can, therefore, work out this probability that after the perturbation we're going to
find the system in state psi j. And so that would be this expression here. So we just
squared up the modulus of that expansion coefficient we just worked out.
So there are various terms in here. There's a sinc squared term here. There's a sinc squared
term here. And there's this term here that's the product of two different sinc functions.
Well as we know, the sinc function, the sine x over x like function, falls off rapidly
once the argument gets much larger than 1.
And here for sufficiently long t nought, that is, for a perturbation that's been on for
a long enough time, either one of these two will be very small. Even if one of them was
large, the other one would have to be small. So what will happen then is that as time t
nought is increased, as we leave the perturbation on for some longer time, these two sinc functions
get sharper and sharper, and eventually, they will not overlap significantly roundabout
our frequency omega here.
And that means, therefore, we are going to lose those terms, that product, and we'll
only be left with these two terms; that product of the two different sinc functions will go
to zero because one or other or both of them has gone to zero. So we're left now with this
expression with two sinc squared terms in it.
So we now have some finite probability that the system has changed from its initial state
psi m to a final state that's different, psi j. This probability depends on the strength
of the perturbations squared-- we see that out there-- and the modulus squared of the
perturbation matrix element. So this is the actual matrix element we're going to square
up, the modulus square of it, to get the result here. And that's the matrix element between
the initial state and the final state with the perturbing Hamiltonian, here just the
time independent part of it in the middle.
With an oscillating field acting on an electron then, the probability is proportional to the
square of the field amplitude because that's buried inside this H p nought. And we're taking
the square of that. And that means that the probability of this transition is proportional
to what we would call the intensity, the power per unit area because in electromagnetism,
the intensity is proportional to the square of the electric field. So the probability
of making this transition from state m to state j is proportional to the intensity of
our light field or electromagnetic field.
In this expression here, what is the meaning then of these two different terms? Well the
first term here is significant if omega jm is approximately equal to omega. That is,
if the energy h bar omega is approximately equal to Ej minus Em.
Since we chose omega to be a positive quantity, this term is significant then if we are absorbing
energy, that is, if j is a state that's above m. That means that we are talking about raising
a system from a lower energy state to a higher energy state with this positive energy here.
We note that the amount of energy we are absorbing is this amount, h bar omega. The first term
behaves, therefore, as we would require for the absorption of a photon. The second term
is significant if minus omega jm is approximately equal to omega. So that, again, this becomes
approximately zero. That is, if h bar omega is approximately equal to Em minus Ej, so
if this is to be the case since h bar omega is positive, that would mean that Ej must
be an appropriate lower energy than Em.
Again, since we chose omega to be positive then, this term is significant if we are emitting
energy falling from a higher energy state, psi m, to a lower energy one, psi j. We note
that the amount of energy here that we are emitting is h bar omega. So this second term
corresponds to the stimulated emission of a photon. That's the process used in lasers.
Now this is not the process that occurs in normal emission by, say, light bulbs or even
the sun. The spontaneous emission of normal light-- to understand that actually requires
that we quantize the electromagnetic field. And we're not doing that here. We're treating
the electromagnetic field as a kind of classical field.
And strangely enough, we actually get the so-called stimulated emission phenomenon out
of this quantum mechanics, which mostly occurs really only in laser light. And we're not
getting the much what we might regard as simpler phenomenon of the ordinary spontaneous emission,
as it's called, of light. To understand that, as I said, we have to proceed much further
with quantum mechanics. And we have to quantize the electromagnetic field. And that's something
we'll have to leave for some other time.