The time-dependent perturbation theory we have done so far is ready to be used. For
example, we could propose some pulse in time that was perturbing some system, and we could
calculate the results that we would get out of that.
A particularly useful example case though is for oscillating perturbations. And very
often, time dependent perturbation theory is used to treat exactly these kinds of problems.
So we could be imagining then an oscillating perturbation that is perhaps varying sinusoidally
in time. And we could call that a harmonic perturbation, with harmonic used in the same
sense as in a harmonic oscillator.
A good example would be a monochromatic electromagnetic wave with an electric field in, say, the z
direction, and possibly in a form like this. So here we have a co-sinusoidal variation
in time on the right, and we've written that in terms of the sum of two complex exponentials,
which will turn out to be a very convenient way to separate this. And we have an amplitude
for the field out the front here. Here, omega is chosen to be a positive number, positive
angular frequency. And we will consider this here in first order time dependent perturbation
theory.
So with our field that we've just set up here, we presume it's going to act on an electron,
and that will give the electron an electrostatic energy in this field relative to some position
z equals 0. And consequently, we'll have a perturbing Hamiltonian that would take this
form. So the magnitude of the perturbation would be the magnitude of the electronic charge,
times the electric field, times the position z. That corresponds to an energy, so we could
say that's our perturbing Hamiltonian.
And we'll write it in this form where we have this function of time here multiplying some
other perturbing Hamiltonian expression that is just independent of time. This Hp0 is just
this here but only the magnitude of it, e times the magnitude of the field, the amplitude
times the position. And this particular operator of course is time independent. And it will
come up when we're taking matrix elements later on with respect to the time independent
energy eigenstate functions.
This perturbing Hamiltonian in this form incidentally is called the electric dipole approximation.
Now, to set this problem up, we're going to presume that this perturbing Hamiltonian is
only on for some finite amount of time. So we presume that it starts at time t equals
0, and ends at time t equals t0.
So formally then, this Hamiltonian can be written as something that is 0 before time
equal to 0 and is 0 after time equal to t0. And in the middle, in this time range here,
it takes on this form we've just set up.
We are interested in the case where for times before t equals 0, the system is in some specific
energy eigenstate. So this is going to simplify our starting condition for the problem. We
don't have to choose this, but it will make our problem simpler to work with, and it's
a typical case to analyze anyway.
So time dependent perturbation theory will tell us with what probability the system will
make transitions into other states. With this choice of starting state here, all of the
initial expansion coefficients, an0, the zeroth order ones, are 0 except for this one particular
one, which will of course be 1. So saying we start in this particular energy eigenstate
before we turned on the perturbation is the same thing as saying that a m 0 is 1.
With this simplification of our initial state to just psi m, the first order perturbation
solution is quite straightforward. We have this equation here now, and only this one
coefficient is going to be 1. And so the summation just reduces to one term. So here's our equation
for the timing variation off the first order correction to the wave function. For state
q, the contribution from state q, it's just this expression here. And of course, this
expression is quite easy to work with.
We're going to substitute our perturbing Hamiltonian in here, which was this one, and with that
substitution and integrating over time from time 0 to time t0, we're going to have this
integral here to evaluate. So we're just writing this out here. Here's our matrix element between
these two states. The initial state psi m and the state of interest, psi q, of our perturbing
Hamiltonian. And we can separate that into our time independent part here and just leave
all of these other terms here from the time dependence that was built into the field.
So we've got two exponentials here, two complex exponentials. Of course, integrating these
over time is quite straightforward. So for times greater than t0 once we've turned off
the perturbation, that means we've integrated from time 0 to time t0. Well, at time 0, these
complex exponentials were just unity. And at time t0, they're this amount here. And
of course, we acquired this denominator from the process of integration. And we've got
two terms, one like this, and one like this-- one with the minus sign in here, and one with
a plus sign in here from the e to the minus psi omega t, and from the e to the plus psi
omega t in our field.
And we can rearrange that slightly. We can take out a common factor here from both of
these terms for example, and that then leaves us with a sine expression from this minus
sign in here after we've taken at this common term with the two in the bottom line. And
similarly, we can do a manipulation on this term to get this form here.
We like this form because these are basically sinc functions, sine x over x functions that
have specific simple physical interpretations we can put on them. So we've got two terms,
one with this sinc function, one with that sinc function.
Well this function, this sinc function sine x over x, is a function that looks like this
on this red curve here as a function of the variable x. We've also plotted the square
of that since that will come up later on. And this function peaks at 1 for x equals
0, but it's only really large in the vicinity of the middle of this graph. As we go out
to larger negative or larger positive arguments, it falls off pretty quickly and it never comes
back.
So this is only large in the vicinity of x equals 0. That means that, for example, this
particular sinc term which we saw in our previous equation is strongly resonant. That is, it
only has strong contributions when the frequency omega is close to the frequency omega qm.
This is the frequency of the field and omega qm is the frequency corresponding to the energy
separation between level q the level m, where level m is the energy we started in.
So now, we have calculated the new state for times t greater than t0 here, which is to
first order this expression here. So this is our original energy eigenstate state of
the unperturbed problem with its time varying factor. And then the change in the wave functions
is the sum over all of these aq1's that we now know how to calculate, for times greater
than t0, that is, the ones that we get to after we finished with the perturbation, again,
times these various eigenstates with their complex exponential time factors in them.
And we have now established, therefore, our approximation to the new state. And now, we
can start calculating the time dependence of measurable quantities.