Fermi's golden rule is one very useful result in time dependent perturbation theory. Though
to illustrate its use we would need to set up some system, quantum mechanically, that
has required dense set of possible transitions. We'll have to postpone that specific use for
some later time.
However, there's another particular problem we can look at, for which we can write down
quite a general result for a simple oscillating perturbation. And that's the calculation called
refractive index. Refractive index tells us how fast light is going in some material.
Specifically, the phase velocity of light is inversely proportional to refractive index.
If we have a refractive index of 1.5, which is roughly the refractive index of a typical
glass, for example, then in that material the phase velocity of light is 2/3 of the
ordinary free space velocity. How, though, can we calculate the refractive index from
quantum mechanics? Well, we'll show here how to do that.
We'll need to set up some standard relations from electromagnetism. If you don't know those
already, don't worry. We'll simply state them here, and then proceed with the quantum mechanics.
So let's see then how we can calculate this perfectly real quantity that we encounter
with materials, one which it's not at all obvious how we could figure it out from looking
at any classical model of materials. So this is a serious exercise in how quantum mechanics
can actually help us calculate real things about materials.
In classical electromagnetism, when we apply an electric field to a material, we can imagine
that the field pulls the average position of the negatively charged electrons away from
the average position of the positively charged nuclei inside the atoms. And that would create
what is called a polarization. And we could give that a letter P here. So we've polarized
the electrons and nuclei in an atom, for example, by applying electric field, and pulling the
electron and the nuclei in opposite directions.
Now at least for applied fields that are small compared to the fields in the atoms themselves,
we would expect that this polarization, P, is approximately proportional to the applied
field. So with some proportionality constant here, we'll call that the susceptibility,
chi. And that's a dimensionless number.
For historical reasons, a fundamental constant is also involved. And this is called, these
days, the dielectric constant. It used to be called the dielectric constant of free
space. It's a number with dimensions to it. But it has no real physical significance.
It's just there because of the way that units were developed historically in electromagnetism.
So with that minor change here, we write the polarization is this electric constant times
chi times the electric field. And this chi is a suspectibility, a dimensionless quantity.
Now in the classical view of electromagnetic waves, the fact that we are moving these electrons
with the oscillating field means that we have a new oscillating current removing these electrons.
And that current itself generates new waves. And this is incidentally a theory we could
look at explicitly quantum mechanically as well.
These new waves we are generating add together with the original waves to give us a new total
wave. They interfere, as it were, with the original waves. And the net result of that
is that the effective phase velocity of the total wave is changed. That's because the
new waves that are generated are not actually quite the same phase as the waves that created
them.
Now this is understandable in a classical sense in a made up model of a material that
consists of little electrons on springs. That's not actually how materials are made. But we
could construct a theory on that basis, and get this current. Anyway, if we propose we
have the current, we can certainly calculate this phenomenon.
And formally then, we would have come up with the refractive index. Because the phase velocity
would have been divided by this refractive index, which we'll call and nr. Now if we
follow through classical electromagnetism of this problem which, for example, we would
use Maxwell's equations to derive, we can conclude that at least for non-absorbing materials
or, to be more precise, materials in spectral regions where they are not absorbing, then
that refractive index would be given by this formula.
So if we know the susceptibility, we could calculate the refractive index. It happens
to be the square root of 1 plus the susceptibility. As I say, to prove that, we'd need to look
at some classical wave theory for electromagnetism.
But it's very standard. Hence, if we can calculate the proportionality between the polarization
and the electric field, that means we can calculate this constant chi here. Then we
can calculate the refractive index for some material.
Well, let's consider a system with a single electron for simplicity, or at least one in
which our interactions only with a single electron. Classically, there's a quantity
called the dipole moment. So we've written that with the Greek letter mu and a subscript
D-I-P for dipole.
And that's associated with moving a single electron through some distance, z. And by
definition, that dipole moment is given by minus e times that distance, z. And the minus
sign here is simply because the electron charge is negative.
Well the polarization then, P, is formally defined as the dipole moment per unit volume.
So we might imagine that we had a lot of atoms inside some volume. And each one of them was
polarized with this little dipole moment. And then the polarization as a quantity would
then be formally defined as the dipole moment per unit volume.
And so the quantum mechanical expectation value of the polarization is something that
would look like this. It would be the expectation value of the position of the electron, multiplied
by the electronic charge-- here with a minus sign-- and divided by the volume in which
this electron system was sitting. Our quantum mechanical task now of calculating refractive
index reduces essentially to calculating the expectation value of P, which is really in
the end the expectation value of z in the presence of our perturbation that our applied
electric field.
We are working in first order perturbation theory. So we can write the approximate total
state of the system as a sum of the unperturbed system plus a first order perturbation. And
we could have put a gamma in here. We are presuming now that we don't need that particular
trick stated explicitly, although we could put it back in if we wanted to. So if you're
worried about it, you could put the gamma back in here to keep track of the orders.
Note we're going to use full time-dependent state vectors, or kets here. So as I said,
Phi 0, the capital Phi 0 is the unperturbed state vector. And capital Phi 1 is the first
order time-dependent correction to that. And of course from our perturbation theory we
know what that is. If we can calculate these expansion coefficients here from our first
order perturbation theory, then this whole ket here for the first order of time-dependent
correction to the wave function will be given by this expression as just an expansion.
And the unperturbed energy eigenvalues En, of course, are associated with this omega
n here. And the eigenfunctions are psi n. The energy En is just H bar times omega n.
Well, with this state vector the expectation value of the polarization would be as follows.
We just have to take the actual state as a [? bra ?] vector, the position vector z, and
the state as a ket vector. And of course we've got these dimensioning constants out front.
Well, formally we can write that out. We can take the product of this pair of functions
here as ket vectors. And the pair of them is [? bra ?] vectors. So substituting for
these psis. And we'll get four terms in our product of these pairs of two functions.
Well this first term here is just what we could call the static dipole moment of the
material in its unperturbed state. So that's not particularly interesting to us. It's just
a constant static polarization that the material might have. So we're not going to consider
that term any further. So we can gray that out, which is what we've done here.
The fourth term here, well you'll see that's got a phi 1 in it, and another phi 1 over
here. This is really a second order term in our overall perturbation. Remember, we could,
if we wanted to, put a gamma with a phi 1.
And hence we would have another gamma with this one. And this would be a term in gamma
squared. And overall that's a second order term. And we're only doing this calculation
to first order. So we'll throw that one away. We'll drop that one.
You can see by contrast these terms are overall just first order in the wave function, at
least. We could think of there being a gamma associated with this phi 1 and a gamma associated
with this phi 1. So we're left with just two terms in our expectation value of the polarization
to first order in the perturbation here.
But because this operator z is a Hermitian operator, then this [? bra ?] operator ket
is equal to the complex conjugate of this one. That's actually a definition of Hermiticity.
And therefore the polarization is actually equal to twice e over V with a minus sign--
the real part of this particular object here-- because an object plus its complex conjugate
just gives us twice the real part of the object.
For the sake of definiteness now, let's presume we start with a specific eigenstate m. So
therefore our starting state is psi m here. And we've put in our time factor. Hence using
the first-order perturbation expansion from this expression here we have that the expectation
value of the polarization explicitly now should be all of this expression.
Now we are interested here in a steady-state situation. So we don't have to take quite
the same approach as we took when we were working towards Fermi's golden rule of having
a perturbation on for a particular period of time. Here we can just leave the perturbation
running all the time. So we can have a continuous oscillating field. And therefore we can simply
take our perturbing Hamiltonian to be the same one as we saw before, but actually going
on forever, if we like. We don't have to put bounds on it.
So we take it to be valid for all times. And then we can rewrite this equation as this
equation here, where we've explicitly put in our perturbing Hamiltonian as before. And
now in this case we have the z inside this matrix element here. We've taken our electronic
charge and our field magnitude out here. And this of course came from our oscillating field
that is built into the perturbing Hamiltonian.
And then we will obtain from that by integrating. We'll obtain this expression here. And because
the field has been on forever, this is a little bit simpler than what we encountered with
the Fermi's golden rule derivation.
So substituting this answer for the expansion coefficient of the cued state to first order
into our expression here for the expectation value of the polarization, so we're simply
substituting this in here, then we get an expression that looks like the following.
So we have a square of this matrix element inside here. Because we had one from this.
And there's one in here already. We have this x of i omega mn t in here. And then we have
these two terms in the overall result.
Now incidentally, just algebraically, note that omega mn is just minus omega nm, which
allows us to simplify the signs a little bit. And then remember we have to take a real part
here. That was in our formula. So taking the real part, we end up with cosines here, instead
of the complex exponentials.
And noting now we're writing in terms of omega nm, that takes care of another one of our
signs that we would otherwise have had. And so here's our expression for the expectation
value of the polarization. And note that out here we have E 0 cos omega t. And that is
actually, with the 2 in it, the original field that we applied to this system.
So from this expression that the polarization is, by definition, the electric constant times
the susceptibility times E, then the susceptibility now we can just cancel the original driving
field, which was all of this here with the cosine 2 E 0 cosine omega t. We can cancel
that out. Put the epsilon 0 on the bottom line. And here we have our expression for
chi.
So if we started in some state psi m, at least conceptually, that's the starting state of
the system. But we have this perturbation just running all the time. Then we're going
to find a polarization that is proportional to the modulus squared of that matrix element,
for each of the possible states of the system, with these denominators built-in here as well
for each of the possible states, n, of the system. So this susceptibility is something
where we have a sum over all possible other states of the system.
So if we can do this calculation, then we can calculate our refractive index. And that
would complete a calculation of refractive index. Hence, if we know all the unperturbed
energy eigenfunctions, basically these psi ms [INAUDIBLE] psi ns and the eigenvalues,
which allows us to figure out these omegas in here, omega nm, for some quantum mechanical
system, we can calculate the refractive index that that material or system would have. And
we've done that using time dependent perturbation theory. So we've been able to use time dependent
perturbation theory to calculate a perfectly real property of a material.
Now there's a key difference that you'll note here between absorption and refractive index.
For absorption, the frequency, omega, must match the transition frequency very closely.
In our theory, it was turning into a delta function.
It might well be a [? Laurencian ?] function, the matching we have to here. But still, the
frequency of the radiation must match the transition frequency very closely. Otherwise
that particular transition will not have absorption of photons associated with it. But for refractive
index the contribution of a particular possible transition from say psi m to psi n to the
susceptibility, and hence to the refractive index, is finite even when the frequencies
do not match exactly or even closely.
That contribution to the susceptibility arises, of course, because of those denominators that
we saw in our expressions-- as omega rises towards omega nm, for example. Note that if
we have an absorbing transition at some frequency omega nm, it contributes to the refractive
index at all frequencies. If we go back and look at our formula for the refractive index,
it had these matrix elements in it, the same ones that we found in the absorbing transitions
in Fermi's golden rule.
There we had to match the frequency very well to get absorption. But the refractive index
is saying, if you have the possibility of absorption at some other frequency, then you
will have a refractive index contribution from that. Refractive index in a region where
the material is transparent arises entirely because of the possibility of absorption at
other frequencies.
That might send a very strange thing. We're not actually doing absorption at those other
frequencies, at least not in any steady sense. There's no net transition rate here. This
perturbation is running continuously. And the state of the material is not really changing.
But nonetheless, the refractive index arises because it would be possible to have absorption
of other frequencies-- a rather strange idea.
If there is a refractive index different from unity, then there has to be absorption possible
at some other frequency or frequencies. Those other transitions have to exist at some other
frequency or frequencies. So this works both ways around.
The relation between refractive index absorption is actually quite well known from classical
physics, in a mathematical sense. Through what are called the Kramers-Kronigg relations--
and I won't state those here, although they're easy to look up-- the derivation of these
relations is almost entirely a mathematical exercise, and does not tell us much about
the microscopic physics of why these arise. And that's in part because in classical physics
we don't really have any good model of materials. So all we have is mathematical relation here--
a very useful one-- but little physical insight as to what's going on. So that mathematical
approach from classical physics really does not help us understand the physical mechanism
whereby absorption and refractive index are related in a real material.
On the other hand, with our quantum mechanical expressions we can understand any particular
aspect in the relation between these two processes. In the quantum mechanical picture, we find
that even though we're in a transparent spectral region there are finite occupation probabilities
for all of the states of the system. And that might surprise us. Because we're not thinking
there's any absorption going on. But nonetheless, it's true.
And these are essential if the material is to have some polarization in it. It's almost
as if when you took your glasses out of their case in the morning and put them on, at that
point perhaps we might imagine somehow the glass becomes excited. And there are these
probabilities of finding the glass in excited state. But that remains fairly constant throughout
the rest of the day.
Incidentally, these probabilities for particular states are not very large. But they're also
certainly not 0. The polarization arises because the charges in the material change their physical
wave functions in response to the field, mixing in other states of the system in response
to the perturbation of the light shining through the glass. If indeed we examine the expectation
value of the energy of this material, your glasses with light shining through them, or
your lenses in your eye with light shining through them, you would in fact find quite
real energy stored in the material as a result. And that's true, even though the material
is transparent.
So now we've demonstrated that we can calculate a useful property of materials using first
order time-dependent perturbation theory, the refractive index. At this point, we've
essentially set up the kind of theory that, if we wanted to do so, would allow us to continue
to calculate non-linear optical effects by simply proceeding here to higher order time-dependent
perturbation theory, for example. But we'll have to postpone any such discussion here.