We've been thinking about superpositions in oscillators and in wavepackets. These may
be superpositions of energy eigenfunctions. Indeed, to make it easy to see what happens
in time, we've deliberately chosen such super positions. Now, previously, we had said that
if something was in a single energy eigenstate that it had a very definite energy. But what
is the energy now for our oscillator or our particle if it's in a superposition of such
energy eigenstates?
To answer this question, we need to go back to the idea of quantum mechanical measurement.
This is a subject that is still philosophically very tricky and is the subject of considerable
debate. However, from a practical point of view, how we handle this is quite straightforward,
even if there's some philosophical doubt about why we can get away with this.
We can find the key to the practical resolution of this problem if we recollect what we said
about the interpretation of the wavefunction. There we said that we would take the approach
that the probability of finding the particle at some point was proportional to the modulus
squared of the wave function near that point. Now, we're going to generalize this concept,
a concept that, as we said before, is known as Born's rule.
So let's see how this works. Suppose then we take some normalized quantum mechanical
wave function, psi of r and t. And we're going to expand it in some complete orthonormal
set of spatial functions, psi n of r, at least at some time, t. And if we allow the expansion
coefficients to vary in time, we can keep doing this at every other time, t.
So we know we can always do this. And our arbitrary quantum mechanical solution of Schrodinger's
equation can be written like this, an expansion in terms of this orthonormal spatial basis
and a set of expansion coefficients that vary in time. And this wavefunction we're going
to presume remains normalized, by the way. The fact that this psi of r and t is normalized
means that we know the answer for the normalization integral.
Whatever this is, when we take the modulus squared of it, then we can write that out
in terms of these expansions here. Here's our psi of r and t. And this is psi star of
r and t. And if we integrate up this whole thing here, it will come to 1. Note incidentally,
when we are multiplying two different wavefunctions that are both expanded, we have to use different
indices for each of these summations here.
Because of the orthogonality of these basis functions here-- in each of these expansions,
they're all orthogonal to one another-- only the terms with the same index on both sides
survive. If this was psi 1 star of r and this was psi 3 of r, the integral of the product
of these two would just be 0. But if these have got the same index, then the integral,
of course, of these, the product of them over space, will be 1.
So all the terms where the n index over here matches the m index over there survive this
overall integration. Because these wave functions are normalized, in other words, this is by
choice an orthonormal set of basis functions, the result from any one of these spatial integrals
where n is equal to m will just be 1 for that spatial integral. And so at that particular
time, we will just be looking at the product of these two coefficients. And hence that
will be cn of t, all squared.
Hence, this proves for us that if this is to be a normalized wave function, the sum
of the modulus squareds of these expansion coefficients always has to equal 1. That's
a consequence of our insistence that this wave function here is normalized. In quantum
mechanics, when we make a measurement on a small system with a large measuring apparatus
of some quantity such as energy, we find the following behavior, which is sometimes elevated
to a postulate or a hypothesis in quantum mechanics.
On measurement, the system collapses into some eigenstate, maybe the nth eigenstate
of the quantity being measured. Mathematically, we imagine we expand the state of the system
in the basis set. That is, that set of eigenfunctions of the quantity being measured, with expansion
coefficient cn. Then the probability that the system collapses into a specific state,
n is the modulus squared of this expansion coefficient, cn.
We just proved incidentally that the sum of all these modulus squareds of these coefficients,
cn, adds up to 1, as we would require if these modulus squareds are to represent probabilities.
Now, you might be a bit disappointed that we are not actually going to explain this
strange collapse phenomenon here. There are several reasons why we're not going to do
that.
First, to understand why this is a philosophical problem and in what way it's a philosophical
problem, it's best to leave this until we understand more about how quantum mechanics
works. Until we do that, our questions would have little meaning, and we might not understand
the proposed answers that do exist.
We would just be descending into mysticism. Second, from a practical point of view, this
rule, which, as we said, could be called Born's rule, just turns out to work very well. As
long as we consider it merely to be an empirical observation for measurements made by large
systems on small ones, this approach always seems to give us the right answer, experimentally.
The third and perhaps most important reason for not explaining this collapse phenomenon
is that we actually don't really know the answer. Resolving this measurement problem
has been a continuing activity in quantum mechanics up to the present day.
The branch of quantum mechanics that deals with these problems is known as measurement
theory. And the core problem is known as the measurement problem. Modern pictures of these
resolutions are much different from those originally envisaged in the early days of
quantum mechanics. Nonetheless, they are still confusing.
And one thing we can say about all the proposed resolutions is that they're generally all
bizarre in some way or another. So for the moment at least, don't worry about why this
is the rule or where it comes from. Just learn it and use it. Treat it as the way we are
going to predict things in quantum mechanics and also how you as a student are going to
complete problems successfully and get good marks and good grades as a result.
So let's look explicitly at the measurement of energy and the kinds of results we're going
to get. Suppose then that we do some experiment to measure the energy, E of some quantum mechanical
system. We could repeat this experiment many times, each time preparing the system the
same way before doing the measurement. And it would appear from our proposition of Born's
rule that we're going to get a statistical distribution of results here.
We will get probabilities, Pn of getting a specific energy eigenstate with energy, En
as the result of the measurement. If that is what is going on, we would get an average
answer for the energy, which would just be the following. We would multiply each energy
by the probability of getting that energy in the experiment.
The sum of all of these would just be the average energy. That's a normal statistical
statement. And we're saying that we are taking these mod cn squareds to be the probabilities.
So therefore, we would say that on the average, the energy we would measure if we did such
an experiment would be this expression here.
And we call this average the expectation value in quantum mechanics. That's also an expression
in statistics. But we're rather explicit about using this idea in quantum mechanics. And
the expectation value has these strange angled brackets round about the quantity we're measuring.
So this is the expectation value of E. It's simply the statistical average based on the
idea of using Born's rule to establish these probabilities. So let's look at an example
of calculating an expectation value. And we're going to look here at a state that we looked
at before, the same one we used when we were thinking about having harmonic oscillators
actually oscillate.
And that coherent state, you remember, has a parameter, capital N, in it. And in that
case, the modulus squareds of the expansion coefficients are just these coefficients here,
these expressions here. And this expression incidentally happens to be the probability
that you will receive little n letters if, on the average, you receive capital N letters
every day, for example. It's that piece of statistics.
Anyway, these are the expansion coefficients modulus squared here from a coherent state
with parameter capital N. Now, we know the answer for what En is. It is h bar omega times
n plus 1/2 h bar omega. So we can rewrite this here as h bar omega times little n times
this expression. And we know the answer to that one, and the answer to this summation
here happens to be capital N.
And we know that answer, because this is just the Poisson distribution in statistics. And
we can look this up. So the average number of letters that you receive every day is going
to be the number of letters you receive on a given day with the probability that you're
actually going to receive that number of letters in a given day from the Poisson distribution.
And the answer for the Poisson distribution is this number, capital N.
Anyway, whether or not we understand how to do this summation here, we can get the answer
to it. And the answer happens to be capital N. So that tells us that if we're in this
coherent state that we discussed before, with this parameter, capital N, the expectation
value of the energy, the average value we will get if we keep setting the system up
in the same coherent state and doing this measurement of energy, that average value
will be capital N plus 1/2 times h bar omega.
So that's the expectation value of the energy if we happen to have put a harmonic oscillator
into a coherent state with this parameter, capital N. Note here that N does not have
to be an integer and can be any real positive number. This is an expectation value, not
an eigenvalue.
The eigenvalue would have to be an integer number plus 1/2 of these h bar omegas. But
this expectation value and this parameter N does not to be a discrete number. We can
have states with any expectation value we want. We can set them up so that we would
get any particular expectation value you want.
So although this is a quantum mechanical system, in this superposition state, it's not constrained
to have just discrete values of energy. At this point, we are setting up our way that
we are going to handle quantum mechanical calculations, calculations that will give
us statistical answers as to what results we will get out of experiments. We've just
been saying that when we set about to measure the energy of some quantum mechanical system,
one that's in a superposition of energy eigenstates, that each time we try to do the experiment
with the system starting out in exactly the same superposition state, we may get different
answers.
Each of these answers will correspond to an eigenstate. Before going any further, we need
to confront what we're doing. We need to see the apparent absurdity of what we're saying.
A classic experiment that forces us to do this is what's called the Stern-Gerlach experiment.
This is an experiment that measures not the energy of an electron, but another property
called spin.
Spin is a property of an electron that, among other things, means that the electron actually
behaves like a tiny little bar magnet. In fact, most of the strong properties of magnetism
and materials come from this property of electrons. We will have to postpone a more detailed discussion
of spin itself for some later time. For the moment, we're going to look at an apparatus
in which we fire electrons through a magnetic field to see how they're deflected.
This deflection and our subsequent observation of a dot on the screen constitutes our measurement
of spin. We're going to look at what this collapse of the state for measurement looks
like here. The consequences of our measurement postulate here are perhaps rather surprising
and not what we were expecting, classically.
So in our Stern-Gerlach experiment, we have an apparatus with some magnetic material in
it, some magnets. And we're just showing the North Pole end of a magnet and the South Pole
end of it. Of course, they have to be joined around in behind, but we're not showing that.
So we've got a magnetic North Pole here and a magnetic South Pole down here. And we imagine
we've got a screen of some kind over here. And we've drawn the center line in here just
for reference. And an important point about this apparatus is that it's deliberately set
up to have a non-uniform magnetic field. Why is it non-uniform between these plates here?
In fact, it's different up here than is down there. Why is that? It's because you see we've
sort of wedged down this North Pole here. So the magnetic lines of force, if you like,
are a little bit more concentrated up towards this North Pole then they are down near the
South Pole, because we've sort of wedged this magnetic North Pole a little bit. So they're
more concentrated in here.
It's a locally stronger magnetic field up near the North Pole in the middle than it
is near the South Pole in the middle of the magnet. So the magnetic field is more concentrated
here than it is down there. So now, we imagine we've got a collection of little bar magnets
here. And these are little small magnets, and they've got north and south poles on them.
And in this case, I'm drawing one where the South Pole is upwards and the North Pole is
downwards. And of course, as usual, a South Pole is attracted to a North Pole, and a North
Pole is attracted to a South Pole. So we're going to take these magnets, and we're going
to imagine firing them through here. And we're going to see what happens. And this is just
a classical experiment we're thinking about for the moment.
So we fire them initially along this dashed line. Now, because the magnetic field is non-uniform,
that is, it's stronger in here than it is down there, this little South Pole is slightly
more strongly attracted to the North Pole then this little North Pole is attracted to
the South Pole. And as a result, a magnet oriented like this fired through here will
be deflected up. The South Pole is slightly more strongly attracted this way than the
North Pole is attracted down the way.
If I were to reverse the direction of this little bar magnet and put the North Pole at
the top and the South Pole at the bottom, this North Pole will be slightly more strongly
repelled from this North Pole than this South Pole would be from this South Pole. And so
in this case, the magnet would be deflected down. And if we had a horizontally-oriented
magnet, it would see no net deflection.
There's no net force on this magnet in here. It doesn't really matter that the field's
stronger here than it is in here. There's no net force, because the North and South
Poles are equally close to both of these larger North and South Poles. And we would think
that magnets of other orientations, if we don't know what they are in here, they're
going to be deflected by some sort of intermediate amount, maybe not all the way up here or all
the way down here, but somewhere in the middle.
So after firing many randomly oriented magnets through here, we should end up with a kind
of a line of results, the magnets hitting anywhere along this line here. Now, that's
fair enough, but what happens when we use electrons in this experiment. Well, electrons
have a quantum mechanical property called spin.
And that spin gives them what we call a magnetic moment. That means the electron behaves like
a tiny little magnet, kind of like those little bar magnets we were showing. So what will
happen if we fire electrons through this apparatus with no particular starting orientation of
their spin? So these are like randomly oriented electrons. We're not preparing them in any
particular way.
And we fire them into our Stern-Gerlach apparatus. We might expect to see a line on the screen,
just like we saw with the randomly-oriented ordinary classical magnets. Incidentally,
I should say that the actual experiment here used silver atoms. But in this sense, in this
particular way, they behave the same as electrons do.
Well, with electrons in our apparatus, we fire the electrons in here. And what we get
on the screen is two dots. So with our randomly-prepared electrons, the result is either the electron
lands up here or the electron lands down there. It never lands anywhere in the middle, even
if the electrons are completely randomly prepared with no particular orientation of their spin.
How do we explain that? Well, I don't think we explain it. But we say it fits in with
what we've been proposing. We've been saying that when we measure something, we collapse
it into an eigenstate of the quantity being measured. Here we're measuring the vertical
component of the electron's spin.
And there are two eigenstates of the vertical component of the electron spin. Those eigenstates
are spin up and spin down. So we have collapse to the eigenstates. This is a measurement
apparatus of some kind. And when we send the electrons through here, we're measuring the
vertical component of the spin. And that means quantum mechanically, we collapse that state
onto one of the eigenstates.
It either has to be a dot up here or a dot down there. And this is quite unlike the classical
situation. And it's very difficult for us to understand this, but it's completely consistent
with our proposal about what quantum mechanical measurement does, even though we don't understand
why it does that, and we don't even know the mechanism in general why that works.
We now see the shocking result of our measurement hypothesis. Apparently this measurement of
the vertical component of the spin forces the results to be only one of two outcomes,
one of two dots on the screen. And here's another shocking result.
If we were to rotate the whole apparatus, the positions of the dots on the screen would
just rotate as well. There was, in fact, nothing special about our choice of the vertical direction
here for our apparatus. There's no special vertical direction overall in space. And gravity
itself is having a negligible effect in our experiment.
If we've rotated the entire apparatus, in that case, the apparatus would be measuring
the spin along another axis. And we would be forcing the electron to collapse into one
or another of the different eigenstates, eigenstates now oriented along this different axis. For
example, we could rotate the apparatus by 90 degrees, and the two dots would be left
and right on the screen instead of up and down.
To make this weirder, for spin, the same quantum mechanical state of the electron can be expressed
as a linear combination, a superposition of up and down or strangely enough, left and
right or even forwards and backwards. Whether or not we understand the details of spin here,
the key point here is that now that we're measuring spin along some axis, we're also
forcing the collapse of the state into one or another of the eigenstates-- up or down
or left and right or forwards and backwards even-- of the quantity being measured.