Now, we're going to introduce another key idea in the mathematics of quantum mechanics.
This is the idea of operators. We will find that for every physically-measurable quantity
in quantum mechanics, there's an operator. For example, for momentum, which is measurable,
there's a momentum operator.
For position, there is a position operator. For historical reasons, the operator associated
with energy has its own name, the Hamiltonian. We're going to find that operators are extremely
useful in the mathematics of quantum mechanics. We're going to start here by introducing the
Hamiltonian operator.
We're going to be able to use it right away for a very cute trick, a particularly easy
and general way of finding the expectation value of the energy for some quantum mechanical
state. Let's look at the Hamiltonian operator. In classical mechanics, the Hamiltonian is
a function of position and momentum. And it represents the total energy of the system.
In quantum mechanical systems that we can analyze using Schroedinger's equation-- so
that means anything with mass and non-relativistic-- we can define the entity, this H with a little
hat over it, as what you'll see is really part of Schroedinger's equation, but we'll
define this entity, minus h bar squared over 2m del squared plus V, the potential of r
and t. And if we do that, just as a shorthand, we can rewrite the Schroedinger equations
as H with this little hat operating on psi of r is equal to e times psi of r.
That's our time-independent Schroedinger equation. And our time-dependent Schroedinger equation,
the same thing on the left, and i h bar d psi by dt on the right-hand side here. Now,
this entity that we've just written down, an H with a little hat on the top, it's not
a number. It's not a function. It's an operator.
And another operator that you're very familiar with is something like the spatial derivative
operator, like d by dz, for example. And we are going to use the notation with this hat
up on top to indicate that we are dealing with an operator. We're not going to rewrite
these kinds of operators by putting hats on them, but for everything else that we come
across in general, we'll be trying to put a little hat on top to indicate that we're
talking about an operator.
What is an operator? The most general definition of an operator is something that turns one
function into another. So you know that when you have d by dz and you operate on some function,
you get a new function, the derivative of the one that you started with. So that's an
example of an operator turning one function into another function.
And this Hamiltonian operator here does exactly the same kind of thing. It turns one function
into another function. Now, this particular operator that we've been looking at so far,
H with a hat on it, is called, of course, the Hamiltonian operator. And just like the
classical Hamiltonian function, it's the operator that is related to the total energy of the
system.
And this idea of the Hamiltonian extends beyond the specific Schroedinger equation definition
we have so far, which was for single non-magnetic particles. In general, in non-relativistic
quantum mechanics, the Hamiltonian is going to be the operator related to the total energy
of the system. So it could be somewhat different from the Schroedinger equation-like version
of it we've seen so far.
We could be talking about photons, or we could be talking about many other things. And we
would be able to still talk about the Hamiltonian as being the operator related to the energy.
Now, why are we introducing this idea of operators?
Well, here's one very important particular reason why we do it. There turn out to be
many reasons why we like to work with the mathematics this way. This one is very practically
important. We're going to be able to show a simple and rather general relation between
the Hamiltonian operator, the wavefunction, and the expectation value of the energy.
To do so, we're going to start by looking at this integral here. So it's the integral
with the wave function of the system on the right, the Hamiltonian operator in the middle,
and the complex conjugate of the wavefunction operator on the left. And we're going to integrate
that over all space.
And psi of r and t is the wave function of some system of interest. So we're presuming
we know this wave function. I'm going to work this integral here. Remember, this H is operating
on this psi in here. In general, it's taking this psi and turning it into another function.
And we're taking the integral of whatever that function is now, multiplying it by this
and integrating it all up. In looking at this integral that we have here, we're going to
expand this wave function and also this one in the normalized energy eigenstates of the
problem, whatever those are. So we presume for the moment that we can know these energy
eigenstates, psi n of r.
And we're going to expand this function and also incidentally, this one in those energy
eigenstates. So here's our expansion. Here are the energy eigenstates. There's some coefficients
as a function of time that go in front of them here. Any function that's going to be
a solution of a Schroedinger equation as a function of time can certainly be written
this way, because at any specific time, we're just doing an expansion in this complete set.
So we can rewrite this right-hand side part here, these two little bits. For example,
if we think explicitly for the moment about the Schroedinger equation form of the Hamiltonian,
although we don't have to restrict ourselves to that. But we know if we take this form
here, operate on the wave function, then we'll be doing this operation, we'll be taking our
Hamiltonian operator, operating on this expansion here.
And the Hamiltonian operating on one of the energy eigenstates gives us En times that
energy eigenstate. We're saying that's generally true, not just for this very specific Schroedinger
equation form of the Hamiltonian. But in general, if I take the Hamiltonian and operate on an
energy eigenstate, I will get En times that same energy eigenstate, psi n of r.
So these two parts on the right-hand side of the integrand here, we can rewrite them
like this. So the integral overall now becomes what we just had concluded. It's En times
the energy eigenfunctions in here inside this sum. And then this is just the expansion of
the complex conjugate of the quantum mechanical state, the psi n of r and t complex conjugated.
So we've broken this integral here down into an integral of a product of two sums of terms.
Of course, we have to remember to use a different index in this expansion from what we used
over here in the expansion of psi n of r and t itself. Now, because of the orthonormality
of the basis functions, psi n or r, the only terms in this double sum here that are going
to survive once we've done the integral are going to be the ones for which n is equal
to m.
So when we do that, we're only left with these terms, where m is equal n. And looking at
all of those terms, each one of them is just cn squared, the modulus of cn squared. So
the result of this entire integral here is the sum over n of En cn squared.
But we recognize that. This is just the expectation value of the energy. So we have a way of writing
down the expectation value of the energy. This integral here with the Hamiltonian operator
in the middle, operating on the wave function on the right and multiplying the result of
all of that by the complex conjugate of the wave function and integrating over all space
gives us the expectation value of the energy.
So why do we want to do this? If we already knew how to calculate the expectation value
of the energy-- and we certainly did, from this expression here where we had figured
out all these expansion coefficients on the eigen function basis and modulus square of
them times En. We had this formula already. This was the probability from Born's rule.
Why do we want to do this? Why do we want to use this new relation? The answer to that
is we don't even have to solve for the eigenfunctions of the operator to get the result. So we've
used those in the proof, but we don't have to use them when we come to do the calculation.
If we know the state, if we know the operator here for energy, we can work out the expectation
value of the energy directly from this integral.
We don't even have to do that expansion in the eigenfunctions. This particular trick
of using the operator associated with some measurable quantity, together with the state
of the quantum mechanical system to allow us to evaluate the expectation value of some
measurable quantity, this trick is quite general in quantum mechanics. We illustrated this
here with the energy operator, the Hamiltonian, and with the evaluation of energy.
But we will keep coming back to this as we introduce the operators for other physical
quantities. This trick and the use of operators generally in quantum mechanics are very important
aspects of quantum mechanics. And we will keep coming back to these ideas and manipulations
again and again as we develop our understanding of quantum mechanics.