Because of its key role in the Schroedinger equation, the Hamiltonian turns out to be
very useful for telling us what will happen in the future. We're going to look here at
one formal relation and how we do that. This particular relation is not so much for solving
problems. Indeed, if we want to figure out what will happen in the future, we already
know how to do that.
We just integrate Schroedinger's time-dependent equation. And this formal relation does not
really help us do that in a practical sense. The usefulness of what we're going to do now
is more conceptual. And we will be coming back to this conceptual idea many times as
we go forward here.
Taking Schroedinger's time-dependent equation-- so here's Schroedinger's time-dependent equation
over on the right-- and simply rewriting it by moving the i h bar about, and presuming
that the Hamiltonian operator does not depend explicitly on time. That really means in Schroedinger's
equation that the potential doesn't depend explicitly on time. Could we somehow legally
rewrite this form here?
Let's look a little bit about at why we would even think of doing that. If the Hamiltonian
operator, H, here was simply replaced by a constant number, then obviously we could take
this equation, pretending for the moment this was just a number, and we could integrate
it. And the result of that integral pretending H was just a number would just be this expression
here.
This is a simple differential equation. And pretending this is a number, we'll get this
form as the result. And you could check that by differentiating back in here.
Now, if with some careful definition, we could figure out a way in which it was legal to
do this, then we would have figured out an operator that gives us a state at time t1
directly from that at time t0. And to think about this legality, we're first going to
note that because H is a linear operator, then for any number a, we can move that around.
That is, H operating on a times a function has to be the same thing as a times H operating
on the function. That's one of our basic properties of a linear operator. And since this works
here for any function, we can do this operation of moving the a around here for any function,
psi of r and t. Then as a shorthand, we could write H then a as the same thing as a then
H.
We have to presume when we write these kinds of operator equations that the operator equation
works because it works for every function that it might operate on. And that's certainly
true here. Next, we have to be careful and define what we mean by an operator raised
to a power. This in itself doesn't necessarily have any meaning until we're careful to define
what we mean by it.
So if we mean by this notation that H squared, we mean H operating on the result of H operating
on the function psi. So H squared here we take to mean this. Provided we define that
notation, then we can get somewhere with this, specifically for example, for the energy eigenfunction
psi n of r. Then H squared operating on psi n of r, we're seeing what that means is H
operating on the result of H operating on psi n of r.
That's H operating on En times psi n of r. But because this H operator is linear, we
can move that En outside here. So that's En times H operating on psi n of r. H operating
on psi n of r is again En times psi n of r. So H squared operating on psi n of r is En
squared times psi n of r.
And we can proceed in the inductive form, inductive fashion to define all the higher
powers that the m plus 1 power of H is H operating on the result of H to the m operating on the
function of interest. So it seems kind of obvious, but we have to be rather careful
to define what we mean by this notation. And this is what we mean by it.
And so for example then, H to the power m operating on an energy eigenfunction will
give us the energy eigenvalue, En to the power m times that same function. So let's look
at the time evolution of some wavefunction, psi of of r and t between times t0 and t1.
Suppose the wavefunction at time t0 is just in space this one particular function here,
psi of r, whatever that is.
And we can expand that psi of r in the basis functions, the energy basis functions, eigenfunctions,
so we get some set of coefficients, an times psi n of r. Then we know that once we multiply
by the right complex exponential factors for the time evolution of each of the basis functions,
and those are the complex exponential factors here, then we have what is going to happen
in the future. We knew what the wavefunction was at this time.
We expanded it in these energy eigenfunctions. We multiply by the correct complex exponential
factors. We add everything up. We're going to know what the wavefunction is at this later
time, t1, from what it was at this earlier time, t0.
Now, in this expression here, we can note that perhaps we can write out the exponential
as a power series. So the power series for an exponential is what we have here. 1 plus
x plus x squared over 2 factorial plus x cubed over 3 factorial. And if we do that, then
this expression that we figured out is just a standard expression for the time evolution
of the superposition of energy eigenstates. This expression with the exponential we would
rewrite in the following form here.
So here's our x, this argument. And we keep raising this x to higher powers-- x to the
1 here, x to the 2 here, divided by 2 factorial, and so on. Now, in this expansion we've just
written down here with our exponential written out as this power series, because we showed
that H to the power m operating on psi n of r was just En to the power m times psi n of
r, we can substitute here to obtain this expression.
So everywhere we had En times psi n of r up here, we can put H times psi n of r here.
Every time we had En squared times psi n of r, we can put H squared times psi n of r.
So we're sort of working backwards from the right hand side to the left hand side of our
Schroedinger-like equations, or working backwards from the right hand side here to the left
hand side.
And of course, with this expression here that we've just written down, because H and all
its powers commute with scalar quantities-- that is, numbers-- we can rewrite this. So
we can move the an over here, move the whole summation over to the right hand side here.
And hence, psi of r at time t1 is everything we see here operating on psi of r at t0.
So provided we make a notational definition that what we mean by the exponential of the
operator is in terms of the power series, that what we mean by this, we're just making
up this notation, if you like, what we mean by this thing where the exponential has got
an operator in the exponent, we mean this power series. And we've carefully defined
what we mean by the powers of an operator. Then we can rewrite our preceding expression,
the one we just had on the preceding slide, that psi of r and t1 is the exponential of
minus iH, the operator, times t minus t0 over h bar, all operating on the wave function.
Because we made this notational definition to give this expression some actual meaning,
then we can write the following expression down here. Hence, we've established that there
is a well-defined operator that given the quantum mechanical wave function or state
at some time t0, will tell us what the state is at some later time, t1. And here is the
expression that does that.
Here is our time evolution operator. So this time evolution operator operates on the wave
function now to tell us what it will be in the future. Incidentally, this will also work
backwards if you like. If you know the wave function now, this will tell us, if t1 is
earlier than t0, it will tell us what the wave function was in the past.
So what we have really established here is that in quantum mechanics, there's an operator
that we can formally apply that mathematically changes the quantum mechanical state from
what it is now to do what it will be at some future time. We have deduced a time evolution
operator. This operator, like the others we are working with, is also a linear operator.
Incidentally, it also preserves the normalization of the wave function. If the state is normalized
now, than the one we get in the future, by applying this operator, is also normalized.
We will be returning mathematically to these ideas later. The important point for the moment
is just that we have devised a linear time evolution operator in quantum mechanics.
And it's based in entirely on the Hamiltonian operator. This link between the Hamiltonian
or energy operator and what happens in time is a profound one in quantum mechanics.