[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have introduced quantum mechanics through the
Schrodinger equation and the spatial and temporal
wavefunctions that are solutions to it.
This is directly useful, for example, for many problems
with electrons and simple oscillators.
This discussion of Schrodinger's equation has
also introduced a large number of the key concepts in quantum
mechanics, such as quantum mechanical states and
amplitudes, Barnes rule for calculating the probability of
outcomes from the modular squared of quantum mechanical
amplitudes, the ideas of eigenvalues and
eigenfunctions, the concept of operators representing
physical quantities, such as the Hamiltonian for energy and
other operators such as those for momentum and position, the
use of these operators for calculating expectation
values, and the ideas of super positions and the evolution of
quantum mechanical systems in time.
But quantum mechanics is much broader than this.
And even those systems that can be handled with the
Schrodinger equation that we've looked at so far are by
no means all the systems we have to look at in the physics
of quantum mechanics.
For example, photons are not described by this kind of
Schrodinger equation.
We've not yet dealt with the spin attribute of electrons
and other elementary particles.
We've not introduced angular momentum.
And we've not considered systems with
more than one particle.
To look at all of these things, we need a more general
mathematical formalism to go much further.
Now, the first piece of good news is that all these
concepts we've been introducing and discussing for
Schrodinger's equation remain central to quantum mechanics
as we go forward.
The second piece of good news is that the more general
mathematical formalism we need is just linear algebra.
If you're familiar with matrices, then you have the
core of this formalism already.
Of course linear algebra is a topic that occurs in many
different areas of science and mathematics.
As I said, we find it in matrix algebra but also in
Fourier transforms, solutions of linear differential
equations, solutions of integral equations, and
analysis of linear systems in general.
Here, as we go forward, we're going to assume that you are
familiar with at least the matrix
version of linear algebra.
Let me emphasize here, the formalism of quantum mechanics
is based on linear algebra, because quantum mechanics is
apparently absolutely linear in certain specific ways.
Specifically, it's always linear in the quantum
mechanical amplitude, which so far has mostly meant a spatial
wavefunction amplitude.
To generalize linear algebra for quantum mechanics, we
introduce shorthand notations, especially what's called the
Dirac's Bra-ket notation.
That's really a pun on the word "bracket." But the
underlying concepts are standard for linear algebra.
Indeed, the Dirac notation is actually one of the best
notations to use for linear algebra generally.
It's particularly intuitive when you use it, and we can
even view it as suggesting for you the operations that you
can perform.
Our mathematical approach here is deliberately informal.
The emphasis is on grasping the core concepts and on ways
of visualizing the mathematical operations.
Indeed, our major goals here will be to give you a way of
visualizing quantum mechanics mathematically and to help
develop an intuitive understanding of quantum
mechanics that extends to a broad range of problems.