Classical intuition leads us to expect that particles with kinetic energy must be moving,
and hence, there will be particle currents or current densities, that is particles crossing
unit area per unit time. We have, however, apparently deduced from quantum mechanics
that there are stationary states, energy eigenstates, where the particle has energy, possibly even
exceeding the potential energy, but yet there may well be no current associated with such
energy eigenstates. If so, this might solve our problem with the hydrogen atom not radiating
in its ground state, for example.
If there really was no electrical current associated with the particle current of electrons,
or at least no changing current, then we would not have to have electromagnetic radiation
from the atom. To make any progress here, we need a meaningful way of calculating particle
current in quantum mechanics so that we can check these notions. We can start by looking
at a mathematical quantity that can tell us the net flow of something out of a volume,
the vector calculus operation knowing as divergence.
In Cartesian coordinates, the divergence of a vector, F is written like this sometimes,
div of F. Actually, I won't use that notation, but this del dot F, and this is like the gradient
operator here, but a vector dot product into the vector F. And the result of that is the
rate of change of the x component of F, with respect to x, plus the rate of change of the
y component of F, with respect to y, plus the rate of change of the z component of F,
with respect to z. And note that the result here is a scalar quantity. Just like the dot
product of two vectors gives you a scalar, this dot product in here also gives us a scalar
quantity.
Now, we can visualize what this means in terms of what we could think of of the flux, F of
some quantity, and by flux, we're thinking about the amount of flow of something. It's
a flow such as of mass or of charge, something like that, but it has a direction as well
as a magnitude. So we could be thinking about the flow of some quantity, like mass or charge,
through a small cuboidal little box, so here's our small cuboidal box, with dimensions delta
x and delta y and delta z and centered round about some point that we've called x0, y0,
and z0 here. Here are our axes, x, y, and z axes.
Now, because this vector quantity F represents the flow of the quantity per unit area, then
some amount is going to flow out of the front face, out of the front of the box, this front
face of the box here, and the area of that front face of the box is delta y times delta
z, the height of the box here. And this would be the value of that vector quantity in the
x direction on this front face, so given that this F represents the flow, this is the amount
that flows out of the front face. The x position of the front face is x0, this point in the
middle of the cube here, plus delta x over 2, and the y positions of this front face
we've got is y0 and z0. So that's the amount that leaves the box at the front, and this
quantity is, therefore, the x component of the flux multiplied by the area of the front
of the box here, the area perpendicular to the x direction.
We can also think of this quantity here as the vector product, dot product between F,
the vector flow, dot producted into what we can think of as a vector delta A sub yz. And
this is a vector, and its magnitude is the area of the front surface of the box here.
And its direction is outward from the box, so along the x direction here.
The amount arriving into the box on the back face, we can calculate in a similar way. In
this case, we will be using x0 minus delta x over 2 as the position, of course, of the
back face of the box. Hence, the net amount leaving the box through the front or back
faces is just the sum of what's flowing out the front minus what's coming in the back.
That's why the minus sign is here, because this is coming in the back. And we can also
write that by dividing by delta x and putting another delta x up on the top here.
And in the limit where we make delta x very small, we assume a small box, this here is
just the partial derivative, dF sub x by dx. We can repeat this kind of analysis for each
of the other two pairs of faces of the box, so adding these three equations together to
get the total flow here, we can write for the total amount of flow leaving the small
box per unit volume of the box, that is we're going to divide by the volume of the box,
which is delta x times delta y times delta z, then the result of that is this divergence
here. So we've shown that this divergence represents the net amount that is flowing
out of the box, in whatever quantity this f represents, for a very small box, in the
limit of a small box per unit volume.
Now, classically, if we're thinking about particles flowing, we can think about the
flow of particles in and out of some box. It's a little box, here, a little unit volume.
To conserve particles, we need to have a relation like the following, where s is the particle
density and j sub p, as a vector, is the particle current density. So what we're saying here
is that if the amount of stuff inside the box is to increase, then there has to be a
net flow into the box. The divergence of the particle current density is the amount that's
going out of the box.
So we put a minus sign in here to give us the amount that's flowing into the box, and
that will lead to a change in the number of particles inside the box. So this is, as it
were, the number of particles arriving per unit time into the box, and that would lead
to a change in the number of particles per unit time. So the time derivative of the particle
density is minus the divergence of the particle current density. So this is the net amount
leaving the box without the minus sign, but with the minus sign, we get the amount arriving
in the box.
Incidentally, we're talking about particle current density here, not yet electrical current.
We could easily get to electrical current. For example, if we were talking about charge,
we could multiply by an e up here, the electronic charge. And similarly, we could turn this
into an electrical current here by multiplying the particle current by the electronic charge
to get the electrical current. But this is particle current density we're thinking of
here.
Now, we want to understand particle current in quantum mechanics, and in a quantum mechanical
case, the particle density inside our little box, as it were, the equivalent of that s
is just the modulus squared of the wave function inside the box. So we are looking for the
relation of this form, but where we have the modulus squared of the wave function in here
instead of s. And what we'd like to use that to do is to figure out what this quantity,
this vector here, particle current is in quantum mechanics. To do this, we need to do some
algebra, and there's a very clever little trick that we do algebraically at one point
in here.
Now, we know that this, of course, is just Schroedinger's equation. We've taken the ih
bar from one side to the other, but this is just Schroedinger's equation here. And we
can mathematically, if we want, simply take the complex conjugate of both sides, so we
complex conjugate everything here. We get a minus sign because we got the i there when
we complex conjugate that.
Now, of course, the time derivative of the product of two functions like this, we can
split into the usual two parts. It's this psi star times d psi by dt plus psi times
d psi star by dt. Then using these relations here to substitute for the d psi by dt, we
use this one, and the d psi star by dt, we use this here. Then we can say that the sum
of this plus all of this is equal to 0. All we're doing here is rewriting this equation
using these substitutions, and then we've taken everything over to the left-hand side.
So so far, just a little piece of algebra here. Presuming that the potential V is real
and does not depend on time, and taking our Hamiltonian to be in the usual form we've
been thinking of for a Schroedinger-like Hamiltonian, then this expression here we can rewrite.
So H operating on psi is minus h bar squared over 2m times del squared psi plus V times
psi.
And H star operating on psi star is minus h bar squared over 2m times del squared psi
star, and that would be plus V times psi star. We've got a minus sign here and here and here.
And of course, this part is multiplied by psi star, psi star, and this part here is
multiplied by psi, so here's a psi, and here's a psi. Well, these two terms just cancel one
another out because these are just the product of three functions, and it's the same three
functions in both cases. So this simplifies to this following expression down here.
So our equation then, that we had before, has now become this equation, and now we're
going to use a very cute algebraic trick. That is one of these things is easy to prove
working backwards, but it's quite tricky to come up with working forwards. This entity
here, we can rewrite by simply adding in this and minus the same thing, and when you do
that, you realize that this expression here, which is the same as that one, is also just
the divergence of the difference of these two terms. That's just a piece of algebra,
and you can check it out if you want to.
So we're going to use this trick to substitute into here, so our equation is now turned into
the following one. And this is looking very interesting now because we've got a divergence
over on the right here, and this is the rate of change of the modulus squared of the wave
function. And this is an equation in the same form as the one that we were looking for with
the modulus squared of the wave function instead of s, as desired. And now, we see what the
particle current is going to be.
So we've got this form of equation. This is, as we wanted, the rate of change of the probability
density. And this equation then enables us to identify what the particle current is in
quantum mechanics, and it's this expression here. So now, if we know the wave function,
we can calculate particle currents in situations where the potential does not depend on time,
but that covers a very wide range of situations. So solely working from this analogy with classical
systems, and working with our Schroedinger wave equation and our wave functions, we now
have an expression that allows us to calculate particle current densities.
Now, this has a very important consequence that we care about here. This expression that
we have come up with also works for an energy eigenstate. Suppose, then, that we're in the
nth energy eigenstate, so here's, for some system or other, here's the nth energy eigenstate
written out in its full time dependent form, if we like. Then our particle current density
as a function of time for this nth energy eigenstate --
well, we have our expression for that, and we can just write it here. So it's ih bar
over 2m times the wave function times the gradient of the complex conjugate of the wave
function minus the complex conjugate of the wave function times the gradient of the wave
function. In this expression that we have just written out here, the gradient has no
effect on the time factor that is built into either of these two functions here, so the
time factors in each of these terms can simply be factored out in front of the whole expression.
And they multiply up to unity, so taking the time factors from both of these, or from both
of these, we can bring them out front here, and these just multiply to unity. So in our
energy eigenstate of any system, then we can write down what the particle current density
is.
In this expression that we have then, there's nothing on the right here that depends on
time, so the particle current density, jp for this nth eigenstate, does not depend on
time. That is for any energy eigenstate n, the particle current density is just constant
in time. So therefore, the particle current is constant in any energy eigenstate. For
real spatial eigenfunctions, in fact, the particle current is actually 0. These two
terms just cancel exactly.
For a particle such as an electron, the electrical current density is simply the electronic charge
times the particle current. Now, a steady current does not radiate any electromagnetic
radiation. It might well have both electric and magnetic fields associated with it, but
neither of those fields would be changing, so there would be no radiation of power in
the waves. This means, then, that an electron in an energy eigenstate does not radiate electromagnetic
radiation.
Should a hydrogen atom in an energy eigenstate be radiating? Classically, the electron orbiting
around about the nucleus would have a time varying current. The electron in a classical
orbit is continually being accelerated because its direction is changing all the time to
keep it in its orbit, and so it would radiate electromagnetic energy. This quantum mechanical
result says that the atom in such a state does not radiate electromagnetic energy because
there is no changing current. The quantum mechanical picture agrees with the reality
for hydrogen atoms in states, and the classical picture does not.
We have finally resolved the problem of why the hydrogen atom, in its ground state, does
not radiate. With our strange quantum mechanical picture, with Schroedinger's wave equation,
and all its unexpected properties, we can not only explain all the energy levels of
something like a hydrogen atom, and we will do that explicitly later, we can also resolve
this old paradox of the previous Bohr model. Once again, quantum mechanics gives a result
that agrees with experiment, even if we may be still puzzled by many aspects of how quantum
mechanics works.