A function, for example, f of x, is essentially a mapping from one set of numbers, the argument,
x, of the function to another, the result or value, f of x of a function. The fundamentals
of this concept are not changed for functions of multiple variables or for functions with
complex number or vector results. We can imagine that this set of possible values of the argument
is a list of numbers.
And the corresponding set of values of the function is another list. One kind of list
of arguments would simply be the list of all real numbers. We could list these in order
as the first real number, x1, and the second, x2, and the third, x3, and so on. Of course,
for real numbers, this is an infinitely long list. And the adjacent values in the list
are infinitesimally close together.
But we're going to regard these infinities as details. In the mathematics we're going
to set up, we're basically going to presume that we can choose a sufficiently close set
of arguments for our function to get a sufficiently good answer. So we will end up working with
some large but finite number of very closely-spaced elements as the arguments. At least that's
the way we will think about it.
If we presume that we know this list of possible arguments for our function, we can write out
the function as the corresponding list of values that we get. And we could choose to
write this list as a column vector. So here would be the value of the function, the first
of our real numbers. Here would be the value at the second one, some small distance away
from that one.
Here would be the value at the third one, some similar small distance away from the
previous one, and so on. So we're writing our function here really as a column vector.
And for example, we could explicitly specify our function at points spaced by some small
amount, delta x.
And so x2 would be x1 plus a small amount, delta x. And similarly, x3 would be x2 plus
this small amount, delta x, and so on. We would do this for sufficiently many values
of x and over a sufficient range of x to get a sufficiently useful representation for some
calculation we would do.
This is typically what we actually do anyway when we do some calculation on the computer
of some function or integrate it or something like that. And we could use this approach
to calculate something like an integral. For example, the integral of the modulus squared
of our function f of x, which is a kind of integral we will often want to perform in
quantum mechanics, would simply be written then-- obviously we could write it as an integral,
but we can write it as the vector product of this column vector and another version
of the same vector turned into a row vector in which we put the complex conjugate of all
these elements.
So if you remember what happens here with multiplying two vectors, this element multiplies
this one. This one multiplies this one. This one multiplies this one, and so on. And we
add up the answers.
And to get this integral right here, we would have to multiply by delta x. So this is an
approximation to this integral here, presuming that we've chosen these x1's, and x2's and
x3's sufficiently close with a small enough delta x. And therefore, provided we choose
delta x sufficiently small and the corresponding vectors therefore sufficiently long, we can
get an arbitrarily good approximation to this integral, at least for the kinds of well-behaved
functions that we'll be working with.
Now, we can visualize a function as a vector. We've drawn a mathematical vector as just
a column of numbers here. But we also think of a vector as a geometrical vector. So imagine
that we have a function, f of x and I'm just drawing the function out first of all as this
black line.
And then I'm marking three points on the function-- so f of x1, so this is x1 here, f of x2, the
green one, and f of x3, the blue one. And we could draw a vector whose components along
the three geometrical axes are just the values of this function at these three points here.
So therefore, we could draw this vector here.
This is ordinary Cartesian space. We've got our x1 axis, our x2 axis, and our x3 axis,
as we're calling them now. And you see that this vector f here has got a little green
line as its projection in this x2 direction. So that corresponds to that short line there.
It's got quite a nice long blue line here in the x3 direction.
So it corresponds to this blue line here. And it's got this quite long red line here
on the x1 axis that corresponds to this red line here. So we've basically taken these
three heights here and used them as the projection to make up this vector, these different projections
here, f of x1, f of x2, f of x3 to make up this geometrical vector.
When we've done this, we realize that if we want, we can think of this function as a vector
in some space. As long as we're using three numbers, of course, we can visualize this
is a three dimensional space. Now, of course, in quantum mechanics, one sophistication we
have to deal with is that our functions are complex. They tend to have complex values,
not merely real ones.
And there may be many elements in our vector or our function. So we have to think about
more dimensions here. We may end up having an infinite number of dimensions, not just
three. But we'll still try to visualize, at least in our minds, that maybe we can think
of a function as a vector. It's a little difficult to visualize this projection here being a
complex number.
But we'll still imagine that we might be able to think of a function as a vector in some
space that is, in some way, a generalization of ordinary geometrical space. So we still
visualize our function and more generally, the quantum mechanical state that it might
represent, as a vector in a space. And at least to help us in our own minds, we might
keep the idea of an ordinary geometrical space in our heads as we think about functions.
We are going to be thinking about functions as vectors in a space. The space is going
to be more complicated than the simple geometrical Cartesian space here. But the basic idea we
may be able to use to help us as we think about functions as vectors.