Now  we're going to think about the bra-ket notation and how we use it to think about expansions
on basis sets. Suppose the function is not represented directly in terms of a set of
values for each point in space, but instead, we've expanded it on a complete orthonormal
basis. So this is a set of basis functions, psi n of x, and we've expanded it in the usual
way. So here are our expansion coefficients times each of the basis functions. We've added
up all of these, and that represents f of x.
And we could also write the function as the ket. It is simply this vector with each of
these expansion coefficients. Now, let me say right away, you may think that somehow
this is a different vector. The idea here is that this is the same vector in this space.
So this ket vector is the same vector in the space, whether or not we write it this way
or whether or not we'd written it with all the values of the functions in here instead.
Anyway, this is our ket vector now representing this function, written in this form now. And
it may well have an infinite number of elements. And the bra vector would just be the complex
conjugates of all of these expansion coefficients, now written as a row vector.
When we write this function in this different form, as a vector containing these expansion
coefficients, we say we have changed the representation of the function. But the function is still
the same. We're just representing it a different way.
So the function f of x is still the same function we had before, and the vector is still the
same vector in our space. What we've done, though, is by changing the representation,
we've just changed the axes that we use to represent the function. So the vector is the
same vector. It's just that the coordinate axes have changed, and now these coordinate
axes have got these numbers are the projections onto the new axes.
And these axes themselves that we're using are just the axes corresponding to those basis
functions as vectors in this space. We'll look at that again later.
So just as before, we could evaluate this integral here. We could work it out just using
the values of the function all the points, or we can expand these functions here. Expand
f of x. This is the expansion of f of x. And we could similarly expand f star of x, the
complex conjugate. We have to use a different index here in order to do this, of course.
We just get the complex conjugate of the expansion coefficients in the complex conjugate of the
function.
So we can move the integral inside the summations here and move everything around so we have
these integrals inside here. Of course, these integrals are just giving us a Kronecker delta
here, because these are an orthonormal basis, we presume. So finally, then, when we have
the Kronecker delta in here, that means that this summation just turns into the summation
of all of the modulus squareds of the expansion coefficients. And of course, that's just the
product of these two vectors, just as before.
Now, we learned already that this integral here was just the sum of the squares of the
expansion coefficients. We already knew that. And it didn't matter which way we worked this
out. We get the same answer for this integral here.
And the same is true here. It doesn't matter which way we wrote the ket and the bra vectors,
whether in this representation or the other representation with the values of the functions
in it. The inner product of the function with itself is just the same number. So though
we've changed the representation, we've not changed the answer to this particular inner
product of f with itself. The answer is the same no matter how we write it.
Similarly, if we were to expand another function, g of x, on the same basis, now we'd get expansion
coefficient dn instead of the cn. Then this integral here would correspond to the product
of these two vectors-- the expansion coefficients for f and the complex conjugates of the expansions
coefficients for g. And of course, that is just the bra-ket product here of the bra version
of g and the ket version of f.
Note that the result of a bra-ket expression like this, or this one here, is simply a number.
In general, it's a complex number. This is certainly a complex number in general. And
that's easy to think of if we think of this as a vector multiplication. Note this number
is not changed as we change the representation, and that's a very important point.
This is an inner product, and just like the dot product of two vectors is an inner product,
it doesn't change if we change the coordinate system. And you may remember that about vector
dot products. The dot product between two vectors is the same, no matter what set of
coordinate axes you use to represent it. And
the same thing is happening here. These are the same ket and bra vectors here as we had
before, no matter what representation we use for them. They're the same vectors in the
space, and the inner product is the same. That's the way that we think about it. But
we may have changed the representation, which is analogous to changing the coordinate system
for thinking about two geometrical vectors.
Now, we can continue to use this notation now to write down ways of thinking about expansion
coefficients. So in our expansion here of the function f of x on this basis psi n of
x, with their expansion coefficients cn or the dn in this expansion of the function g
of x, this is simple to evaluate these coefficients, because as we know, these functions are orthonormal
and we've done this before. Since psi n of x is just a function, we can also write it
as a ket now if we want to.
And to evaluate this coefficient-- for example, some specific coefficient cm-- all we do is
we pre-multiply by the bra vector. So pre-multiplying the ket vector f of x by the bra vector psi
m of x-- well, let's look at what that does. We'll put that inside the expansion now, or
expansion now we're writing the ket vector versions of psi n of x. We're pre-multiplying
by the bra vector version of psi m of x.
Of course, since this is an orthonormal set, these just reduce to Kronecker deltas, and
so we have our expansion coefficient cm. So our expansion coefficient cm is simply this
bra ket product.
Using the bra-ket notation, we can write out this function as the expansion, as we've talked
about before. This is the expansion using the ket vector version. We can move this number
around if we want to. Moving numbers and vectors, numbers commute with vectors, so we can move
the number to here, and we can give a version of that number and get this rather intriguing
looking notation here. This is also a way of writing the expansion of f of x, and we'll
come back to see another way of interpreting what that means later on.
As we said, because cn is just a number, it can be moved about inside the product. Multiplication
of vectors and numbers is commutative. Often, in using bra-ket notation, we will drop the
explicit argument x, in which case, we can write out this slightly more compactly.
So now we see a key reason for introducing the Dirac bra-ket notation. It's a generalized
shorthand way of writing the underlying linear algebra operations we need to perform, and
it can be used whether we are thinking about representing functions as continuous functions
in some space or as summations over basis sets. It will also continue to be useful as
we consider other quantum mechanical attributes-- ones that are not represented as functions
in normal geometric space. One good example of that is the spin of an electron, though
we will have to postpone the detailed discussion of that for some later time.
Now, in quantum mechanics, the function will often represent the state of the quantum mechanical
system, such as the wave function, and the set of numbers represented by the bra or the
ket vectors are also just representing the same state of the system. Hence, we refer
to this ket vector here as the state vector of the system if it's in the state corresponding
to the function f. And we could also refer to this bra vector as simply the Hermitian
adjoint of that state vector.
In quantum mechanics, the bra or the ket always represents either the quantum mechanical state
of the system, such as a spatial wave function psi of x, or some state that, at least in
principle, the system could be in, such as one of the basis states psi n of x. Now, the
convention for symbols in bra and ket vectors is really rather loose. Usually, one deduces
what is meant by what's inside the bra or ket based on the context that you're in. For
example, if it's obvious what basis we're working with, then we might just simply write
the ket vector as something with maybe an n in it to represent the nth basis function.
It would just save us some writing just to put an n instead of saying psi n or something
else, or complicated.
So we simplify this notation to this one, or maybe all the way down to this one here.
Whatever we put inside the bra or ket should just be enough to make it clear what state
we are discussing. Otherwise, there are actually really no rules for this notation. What's
inside here is just a label that tells you what the state is.
For example, we could write this expression-- all of this entire sentence here-- and put
it inside a ket vector. There's nothing wrong with that mathematically. This statement in
here is enough to tell you what this ket vector is representing. It's rather silly to write
it out in this way, but this is perfectly legal mathematically. What's inside the ket
vector is just a label that describes for you what the state is.
But we probably already know that we're talking about a harmonic oscillator of some kind in
the problem that we're dealing with, so we don't need to write all this out. And we might
just simply write 0, because this would be the n equals 0 state of this harmonic oscillator.
But as I said, there's no particular rules for what is inside the bra or ket vectors.
They're just labels.
So here we might have 0 representing this quantum number, and that would be quite a
common notation. But it's not a defined notation that there's always that specific meaning
in an arithmetic sense to what's inside the bra or ket vectors. Either of these is perfectly
correct mathematically.
Note that because the convention for what we put inside these bra and ket vectors is
very loose-- essentially they're just labels that we like for whatever state we're describing--
there is no particular reliable rule for manipulating anything based just on what is inside the
bra or ket vectors. It could be that we used a wave function as the label, or maybe we
used some quantum number, or maybe we have some other descriptive name. Unless we explicitly
are attaching some direct algebraic or arithmetic meaning to the label-- which we might well
be doing, if it's a quantum number, for example-- we cannot reliably perform any particular
mathematical manipulation based just on what is inside the bra or the ket. It is best to
regard these labels as just being descriptive text, essentially, unless we know otherwise
in a particular situation.