Now that we've established operators for angular momentum and some of their basic properties,
we can start to look at the eigenfunctions of these operators. Understandably, it's better
to describe something like angular momentum eignenfunctions, not on x, y, and z-axes directly,
but on axes based on angles. Specifically, we will mostly be using spherical polar coordinates
to handle angular momentum and its eigenfunctions.
Spherical polar coordinates can look somewhat more complicated-- especially when we have
to handle something as sophisticated as a del squared operator, although, ultimately,
what is going on here is fairly straightforward-- at least, once we get past some algebra that
can look a little daunting at first.
So here are our spherical polar coordinates. We have x, y, and z directions, of course,
as usual. And the spherical polar coordinates have got two angles in them-- phi and theta--
and the distance from the origin to some point of interest here. So the relation between
the spherical polar coordinates in terms of r, theta, and phi, and the Cartesian coordinates
in terms of x, y, and z, is something that we can work out.
Explicitly, x, here, will be r sine theta cos phi. So that is, if we take our vector
r here, if you like, and this length r, and we project it onto these axes here, the x-coordinate
component here will be this component of r projected onto the plane. So that's r sine
theta. And then that component on the plane, projected onto the x-axis here, which is r
sine theta cos phi.
Similarly, the y component will be the same r sine theta-- that's the length of this line
here-- but now projected onto the y-axis. So that's r sine theta-- this distance here--
sine phi, projecting over onto the y-axis here. And the z component is just r cos of
theta-- the projection onto the z-axis.
Theta is called the polar angle, and phi is called the azimuthal angle. So a strange word--
azimuthal angle.
In inverse form, the formulas can look a bit more complicated. If we want to figure out
r in terms of x, y, and z, well, that's relatively straightforward. That's just adding up the
squares, and taking the square root to get, essentially, the length of r, of course. The
theta, we have to take a sine to the minus 1, and we can figure that out, if we like.
This is the x squared plus y squared here. That is the length in the x, y plane, and
this is the length of this vector here. So the theta is sine to the minus one of the
ratio of this distance over that distance. And the phi is tan to the minus 1 of y over
x.
With these definitions of our spherical polar coordinates, and using the standard partial
derivative relations of the form-- like what we have here, so that d by dx would be dr
by dx, d by dr, plus d theta by dx, d by d theta, plus d phi by dx, d by d phi, with
all of these of course being partial derivatives-- this is a standard form to work out a new
form of partial derivative in a new coordinate system. If we use those for each of the coordinates
directions, then we can rewrite the angular momentum operator components in spherical
polar coordinates.
Now, this can look a little frightening, but it's straightforward. From this relation here--
from our commutator, and this one here, and this one here-- we obtain that Lx is i h-bar
times this relatively complicated looking expression in here. And Ly is i h-bar times
this relatively complicated looking expression. But Lz, fortunately, is rather simple.
So I'm not working through the algebra here. This is something you can check out if you
want to. But the Lz operator is particularly simple to write down-- minus i h-bar, d by
d phi. These ones are usable, but they're rather complicated looking. And as I say,
you can check that algebra if you wish.
Now, because, we've got such a simple expression for the Lz operator, we can look right away
at its eigenfunctions and eigenvalues. Using this expression here for Lz, we can solve
for those eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of Lz. It's rather simple. The eigen equation
for these eigenfunctions-- whatever they are-- would be some eigenvalue times the same function
of course. And we have chosen here to write that eigenvalue in the form m h-bar. We've
not yet figured out what this number is. This is just a number. But we're going to solve
this eigen equation to deduce that.
Well, rather obviously, you can check that a simple function like this, of the form e
to the im phi would be a solution of this equation. And we would get m h-bar here. We
have to do a little bit more work, though.
The requirement that the wave function and its derivative are continuous when we return
to where we started-- that is, when we go around a complete 2 pi of angle, here-- means
that the number m must be an integer. It can be positive, it can be negative, or it can
be zero, but it must be integer in that sense. Hence, we find that the angular momentum around
the z-axis is quantized, with units of angular momentum of h-bar. The eigenvalues are m h-bar,
where m is an integer-- positive, negative, or zero.
We see, then, that the eigenfunctions of the Lz operator are quite straightforward when
written in these spherical polar coordinates. But what about the eigenfunctions of the Lx
and Ly operators? After all, the differential operators for those two looked rather complicated
in the spherical polar coordinates around the z-axis.
Certainly we can understand that the eigenfunctions of the angular momentum about the different
axes are not the same, as required by the fact that the different angular momentum operators
do not commute. However, our choice of the z-axis is quite arbitrary. We could equally
well have chosen x or y-axes as the polar axis for our coordinate system. In which case,
we would see quite clearly that the eigenfunctions of the Lx and Ly operators are actually of
similar form to the ones we just deduced for Lz-- but in terms of the angles of rotation
about the x and y-axes, respectively.
Hence, the eigenfunctions of the angular momentum operators Lx, Ly, and Lz are not the same--
consistent with the fact that these operators do not commute. But the eigenfunctions for
each specific one of these operators are quite simple to understand.