We will often use Dirac notation in writing equations associated with angular momentum.
We could write, for example, L squared operating on this ket here. And we've put in the indices
for l and m inside the ket. We'll presume that we realize we're talking about spherical
harmonics, and these, then, are the indexes, or indices, for the spherical harmonic. And
similarly, we have it on the right hand side, as usual, for our eigen equation.
And we write that instead of writing everything out with the spherical harmonic function.
There's no difference between these two equations. But this one gives us a shorthand form. And
the Lz equation we could similarly write Lz operating on the same ket here equal to mh
bar on that ket. With this ket, we understand, is this spherical harmonic instead of writing
out the spherical harmonic here with its theta and phi in it.
A common notation in atomic physics is the s, p, d, f notation. And the spherical harmonics,
of course, come up in the solution of the hydrogen atom problem and different values
of l were observed by spectroscopists in the 19th century to give rise to different sets
of spectral lines from hydrogen. Now at that time, they did not know that these were parametrized
by this number l. But nonetheless, they could see these groups of spectral lines.
And they called them the spectral set, the principle set, the diffuse set, and the fundamental
set. Now it turns out these terms here have essentially no meaning other than to give
us these letters here. They don't have any physical meaning in and of themselves, but
they do, in fact, correspond to the different values of l.
So each of these is now identified, as I said, with specific values of l. And we can also
alphabetically extend this series to hire l values. So we end up with the following
notation, which is very common in talking about atoms. l equal to zero is notated as
s. l equals 1 is notated as p. l equals 2 corresponds to d. l equals 3 corresponds to
f.
And then, from that point on, we just go alphabetically. So l equals 4 would correspond to g. l equals
5 would correspond to h. It's rather convenient that the s wave functions are actually all
spherically symmetric. But the s of the original notation had nothing to do with that.
Now then, we've understood the solutions of a somewhat abstract problem, the eigenfunctions
of angular momentum operators in quantum mechanics. Of course, we've been doing this so that we
can go on to solve one of the most important problems in quantum mechanics, the one that
lies at the core of all of our basic understanding of chemical elements-- the hydrogen atom.
These spherical harmonic functions, in particular, turn out to give us all the angular properties
of the atomic orbitals in the hydrogen atom. Looking at that whole hydrogen atom problem
will be the subject of our next section.