Now we have set up our problem as two differential equations, one of which for the center of
mass motion itself of the entire hydrogen atom, was so simple, we've already solved
it. Our next task will be to solve the second equation, the equation for the relative position
of the electron and the proton. Before doing that formally, we can perform a very rough
solution, just to get the scale of the problem and to set up some more convenient units.
So we're going to presume that the hydrogen atom we get in the end will have some characteristic
size. And we'll call that characteristic size the Bohr radius. And we'll give it a label
a with a subscript o on it, or a0. And we expect therefore that the kind of magnitude
of the potential energy we'll be talking about it will be the one that corresponds to the
electron and the proton being separated by approximately this amount of distance, whatever
it is.
And we could strictly call that the expectation value of our potential energy, but we're only
evaluating this approximately. And so that therefore would be something like minus e
squared over 4 pi epsilon 0 times this separation distance here, the Bohr radius. So that's
roughly the scale that the potential energy will be in this problem, we think. For the
kinetic energy, we're going to look at what happens when we have some reasonably smooth
wave function of characteristic size of order a0, Bohr radius.
So I've just sketched some relatively smooth function here. And the value of the function
in the middle, I've called it psi of 0. And I've given the function a rough size of about
a0 in each direction out here. I'm only doing this also in one dimension, so this is not
in any sense correct. But it can give us a rough answer here.
The second spatial derivative, just considering this one dimension here, will be something
that is really the difference in the slope of this line minus the slope of this line.
That's roughly how much the first derivative is changing from one side to the other of
this function, and divided by the distance over which that change takes place. Now, we
could choose various different definitions for these that would give us slightly different
answers, but it doesn't matter here.
We're just trying to get a very rough answer. So the approximate scale of the second derivative
is something like this slope minus that slope divided by this distance here. And that's
going to give us approximately minus psi0 over a0 squared. This is only meant to be
a very rough estimate here.
It's not exact in any sense, but we're trying to get the general scale of what this second
derivative will look like. And we're only expecting to get it right within some moderate
factor. We could've made definitions differently, or we could have tried to do this more formally
in three dimensions. And we would have got slightly different answers.
But we're just looking for the general scale here. Now, we remember that for some mass
mu, the kinetic energy operator, of course, is h bar squared over 2 mu times del squared.
And we just figured out a very rough estimate for del squared. And that would therefore
suggest to us that the rough scale of the kinetic energy in here would therefore be
about h bar squared over 2 mu times a0 squared.
Remember, our second derivative that we worked for our relatively smooth function is really
a negative number, and that's why the negatives cancel here. Now, we take an approach known
as a sort of variational approach. This is an approach that we can justify a bit more
rigorously later on. And in an approach like that, we adjust a parameter, such as a0 here,
to try to get the lowest value of the total energy.
And as I said, such variational approaches can be justified rigorously in more complete
versions of a theory as approximations for getting to the lowest energy. So we're going
to add the kinetic and potential energies together, and we're going to adjust this distance
here to try to minimize the total energy of the system in the hope that that will give
us some reasonable estimate for the energy that the system is going to choose.
So with our very simple model here, the total energy, the sum of the kinetic and potential
energies, is here's our kinetic and here's our potential energy, a negative number. And
the total energy is a balance between the potential energy, which is made lower-- that
is, more negative-- by choosing a smaller Bohr radius, and the kinetic energy, which
would get larger if we make the Bohr radius smaller. So in this expression, there is some
optimum.
If we squeezed it too much, we'd put the energy from the kinetic term up. And if we don't
squeeze it enough, the potential energy won't be low enough. So, a balance between these
two. And for the simple model then, with our total energy written like this, differentiation
and trying to find the minimum in that basis will find a choice of a0 that minimizes the
energy overall. And that will be this choice here.
So simple differentiation to find the minimum of this as we adjust a0 would give us a value
of a0 of this form here. And that form corresponds to about half an Angstrom, or about 5 times
10 to the minus 11 meters. And that we will call the Bohr radius. In fact, I have chosen
my various arbitrary constants throughout this argument, of course, to get the sort
of right answers at the end.
But anyway, this is a0 here is the rigorous definition that we're going to find later
on for what we call the Bohr radius of the hydrogen atom. So we can see therefore on
the basis of this very rough argument that the hydrogen atom is approximately one Angstrom,
or 0.1 nanometers in diameter. With this choice of Bohr radius we've just come up with, the
corresponding total energy of the state, if we plug that back into our previous formula,
would be this expression here.
And we can usefully define something that we call a Rydberg energy unit. So that's just
this expression here without the minus sign. This energy unit here is called the Rydberg.
It's written with the characters capital R small y. And its magnitude is approximately
13.6 electron volts. And in that case, the energy of the hydrogen atom in what we presume
is it's lowest state would be minus 1 Rydberg, or minus 13.6 electron volts.
So though we have produced these terms, the Bohr radius and the Rydberg by very rough
arguments, very informal ones, they will turn out to be rigorously meaningful as we go through
the proper derivation of the solutions of the hydrogen atom. And from this rough argument,
we could get numbers of roughly this scale as what we expect as the kinds of solutions
from the hydrogen atom.
And indeed, the lowest energy state of the hydrogen atom is, in fact, minus 1 Rydberg.
So now, we have the equation we want to solve, a Schrodinger equation for the relative motion
of the electron and the proton. And we've understood a rough estimate of the solution.
The full solutions of the Schrodinger equation will be the hydrogen atom orbitals, the energy
eigenstates and the energy eigenvalues for the hydrogen atom.
In the next section, we will complete the solution of the hydrogen atom.