Now we're going to look at one of the most important problems in quantum mechanics, and
the one that was a remarkable success for Schrodinger's wave equation-- the hydrogen
atom. Understanding the hydrogen atom sets us up to understand the nature of atoms and
the basics of chemical elements, so it's of profound basic and practical importance. It
also gives us much of the nomenclature which we'll use to describe atoms.
The hydrogen atom is also mathematically exactly solvable, so it's an excellent exercise in
quantum mechanics. It's somewhat more difficult to solve than the very simple particle in
a box and the harmonic oscillator problems we've looked at so far. But nonetheless, we
can lay out the solution in its entirety without major difficulties. Our discussion of angular
momentum and the spherical harmonic eigenfunctions has already dealt with a major part of the
problem for us.
In addition to its impact in chemistry, we can also use the hydrogen atom solutions in
engineering. In semiconductors, for example, the phenomenon of what are called Wannier
excitons uses a scaled version of the hydrogen atom solution, and that is essential in explaining
the actual optical absorption of semiconductors in optoelectronic devices.
There's another reason why the hydrogen atom is also an excellent tutorial problem. With
the hydrogen atom, we have to deal with a system with not one, but two particles-- the
electron and the proton. The wave function of two particles is somewhat more sophisticated
and interesting than we might have thought. And we'll start by thinking about just how
we're going to extend our quantum mechanics to handle more than one particle.
So how then should we tackle this problem of two particles, the electron and the proton?
Well, what we do, first of all, is we start by generalizing the Schrodinger equation.
And now we mean quite generally, for example, for time-independent problems, that the Hamiltonian,
operating on the wave function, is equal to the energy times the wave function.
Now this wave function, we presume, could now be the wave function of two particles
or possibly more. And this Hamiltonian would be the energy operator for these two particles
or possibly more particles. So this is a generalization of Schrodinger's equation.
The Hamiltonian is the Hamiltonian of our whole system now of however many particles
we have in it. And the energy will be the energy of the whole system. And the wave function
will be the wave function of the whole system. So as I said, explicitly now, the Hamiltonian
is the operator representing the energy of the entire system, and Psi is the wave function
representing the state of the entire system, no matter how many particles it has in it.
Now for the hydrogen atom, there are two particles, the electron and the proton. And each of these
has a set of coordinates associated with it. So we have x, y, and z-coordinates for the
electron-- which we've indicated with the subscript e-- and x, y, and z-coordinates
for the proton-- which we've indicated with the subscript p. The wave function will, therefore,
in general, be a function of all six of these coordinates.
This may not have been what you were expecting. Perhaps you were thinking that we could just
have a wave function for the electron-- a function of the electrons x and y and z-coordinates--
and a wave function for the proton-- a function of its x and y and z-coordinates. But in fact,
we have one function for all six coordinates. Why is this?
Well, an analogy may help here. Think of a collection of dancing couples performing a
dance like a Waltz, for example. In a Waltz, the man and the woman and the couple move
around the dance floor, and they turn around one another as they go around. And approximately,
they will eventually circle all the way around the dance floor.
Now, we could write down a probability distribution for the male dancers on the dance floor. Since
the dancers do get around the entire room during the course of the dance, their probability
distribution would be spread over the whole dance floor. Similarly, for the female dancers,
their probability distribution would be spread around the room.
But those individual probability distributions would miss the fact that the man and the woman
are generally to be found together as they dance in a couple. Though the probability
of finding a male dancer is a distribution that spreads over most of the dance floor,
and similarly, for the female dancer, the probability of finding a male dancer beside
a female dancer is very high since they're dancing in pairs. Similarly, writing down
the probability function for the male and the female would completely miss this fact.
Our description of the electron and the proton needs to explain similar phenomena. With the
hydrogen atom in a box, the hydrogen atom might well be found anywhere in the box. The
electron could similarly be found anywhere inside the box, as could the proton. But whenever
we find the proton, we are very likely to find the electron close by. Having the wave
function be a function of all six coordinates allows us to handle situations like this.
But two separate wave functions-- one for the electron and one for the proton, each
of three coordinates-- in general, would not.
Now in some specific situations, we'll find that we can simplify back to something equivalent
to different wave functions, each with three coordinates. For a hydrogen atom in free space,
we can do this, but these individual three coordinate wave functions are not the wave
functions of the electron and of the proton separately. This does mean that in quantum
mechanics, with large numbers of particles, the full description would require wave functions
with very large numbers of coordinates.
Three particles would require nine coordinates. A small lump of material would require a wave
function with something like 10 to the power of 23 coordinates. Now, in practice, we can
sometimes find ways to simplify such problems by making key assumptions. And this is indeed
what we have to do to describe the physics of materials.
But underneath all those simplifications is the fact that we really have one multiple
particle wave function, with possibly a very large number of arguments. So if we have n
particles, then we need a mathematical space with three times n dimensions, instead of
just the three dimensions of normal Cartesian space for one particle. Such a mathematical
space is sometimes called a configuration space.
This should not be confused with the Hilbert space. The configuration space may have three
dimensions for each particle. The Hilbert space has possibly an infinite number of dimensions
for each degree of freedom, that is, for each coordinate direction for each particle.