Thus far, we've dealt primarily with energy, position, and linear momentum. And we've proposed
operators for each of these. One other quantity that is important in classical mechanics,
angular momentum, is also particularly important in quantum mechanics-- especially for the
hydrogen atom.
In classical mechanics, anything that is spinning has angular momentum, including something
like a moon orbiting around about a planet. Though the electron in the hydrogen atom is
not a little speck, or point, or particle that is orbiting around about a nucleus--
like a moon goes around a planet-- nonetheless, the idea of angular momentum is still important
in the proper, quantum mechanical picture of an atom like hydrogen.
Although Bohr's early proposal of his hydrogen atom model was not quite right, it did correctly
identify that the quantization of angular momentum in units of h-bar was quite important.
Before we start discussing the hydrogen atom, then, we need to understand the angular momentum
in quantum mechanics. Once we've done this, much of our understanding of the hydrogen
atom will become quite straightforward.
Linear momentum eigenfunctions are functions of position along a specific spatial direction.
Angular momentum eigenfunctions are functions of angle, or angles, about a specific axis--
there's a couple of angles here that we can talk about. As a result of this, unlike linear
momentum, angular momentum always has discrete eigenvalues. For eigenfunctions in space,
this is associated with the fact that, once we've gone an angle 2 pi around in a circle
about a particular axis, we have to be back to where we started.
The behavior of angular momentum operators is also somewhat more complicated than linear
momentum operators. But the mathematics we've set up for operators will make it still relatively
straightforward to deal with these angular momentum operators. So first of all, let's
preview where we're going with angular momentum in quantum mechanics.
For our angular momentum, we're going to have operators corresponding to angular momentum
about different orthogonal axes. So we'll have one for the x-axis-- that will be Lx--
and one for the y, and one for the z. But the strange thing about them is that they
do not commute with one another. In general, these operators do not share eigenfunctions,
and that's in contrast to what we're used to from linear momentum operators, for example,
for the different coordinate directions. px, py, and pz, would all commute with one another.
There is, however, another rather useful operator when thinking about angular momentum. And
that one is called L squared. And that does commute separately with each of these operators--
Lx, or Ly, or Lz. The eigenfunctions for Lx, Ly, and Lz are individually going to be quite
simple. The ones for L squared are things called spherical harmonics, and the face of
it, they look much more complicated. However, they can be understood relatively simply.
And these are particularly important because they form the angular shapes of the hydrogen
atom orbitals. So these spherical harmonics are at the root of all the orbitals in atoms.
So let's look at classical angular momentum first. And we'll build up towards how we're
going to generate quantum versions of angular momentum operations. Here, we're showing some
axes-- an x-axis and a y-axis. And we imagine we have some particle or object moving along
like this-- just a classical object. And at some position, vector r, our object happens
to be there. And we've got an angle theta between the direction the object is going
and this position, vector r. So we've got a momentum vector and a position vector for
this object, and there's an angle theta involved with that.
So the classical angular momentum of some small object of linear momentum, p-- that's
this vector here-- centered at some point-- here's where the object is-- that is given
by a position vector, r-- relative to the origin of our coordinates-- is formally the
cross product of the position vector and the momentum vector. And that's called the vector
L, and that's a vector that will be in this direction, perpendicular to x and y here.
You might, incidentally, think it's a little odd to think of something that's going in
a straight line as having angular momentum. You're perhaps more used to thinking of something
that's going around in a circle as having angular momentum. And it certainly does, if
it goes around in a circle here. This L equal to r cross p can be a good constant of the
motion of a system.
But it's also mathematically true, and physically as well, that a particle going in a straight
line relative to some specific point or some origin does also have angular momentum. And,
classically, this angular momentum-- we'll find if we check it out with the formula we're
going to write down-- it is also conserved, even if the particle's just moving in a straight
line when we're thinking about angular momentum relative to this origin. Anyway, we can write
angular momentum in this form no matter what kind of motion we're actually thinking of.
Now, let's remind ourselves of the vector cross product operation. As usual, if we take
two vectors, A and B, and multiply them in this order, A cross B, we can work out what
that is. There are two formulas for doing that. One is this one, involving the sine
of the angle between these vectors. So this is a vector in a specific direction, given
by this unit vector, c, here. And A is the magnitude of vector A, and B is the magnitude
of vector B, and sine theta is the angle between them.
There's also another form, directly in terms of the components, of the vectors. And this
could be, as we've written out in this long formula here-- or, if you remember how to
work out determinants-- this form here is a shorthand way of writing down everything
that we see down here. And these i's, j's, and k's are unit vectors in the x, y, and
z directions. So, formally, Ax is the component of the vector A in the x direction, and so
on. And the components of B are similarly defined.
Now, in this expression that we have here, formally, C is perpendicular to the plane
in which A and B lie, just as the z-axis is perpendicular to the plane containing the
x and y-axes, for example-- in right-hand axes. And theta is just the angle between
the vectors A and B, as we said. And c is a unit vector in the direction of the vector
C. So that's in a direction perpendicular to the plane in which vectors A and B lie.
Note that in this expression here the order of the multiplications that we have chosen
to write is rather careful, and it's always in the order moving from top row, to middle
row, to bottom row. And we've chosen that explicitly in this expression that we have
here because we are going to be working later on with operators, and the order in which
we perform the multiplication, as it were, of operators is rather important because of
the commutation-- or otherwise-- of operators. So the sequence of our multiplications in
our cross product expression is always going to be from top, to middle, to bottom.
With classical angular momentum, L equals r cross p, we can if we want write out the
various components. So from our formula we were just working with, Lx, the component
in the x direction of this vector cross product, would just be y times pz minus z times py--
and, similarly, for the other two components, the component along the y direction and the
component along the z direction.
Now, we are going to propose a quantum mechanical angular momentum operator, L-- so we put a
hat on it, here. And we're going to base that on substituting in the position and momentum
operators. So every time we have, say, the y-coordinate value in here, we would replace
that by the operator for the y-coordinate. Now, because we're working in the position
representation at the moment, it's not really very obvious that there's much difference
between the coordinate y, itself, and the operator representing it. But in the case
of the momentum operators, of course, we know that, indeed, we have quite a different expression
here that we're going to substitute for the quantum mechanical momentum operator in the
z direction-- and similarly in the y direction, and in the x direction.
So now our new operator for angular momentum is going to be the position operator vector
cross producted into the momentum operator. And, because we're in the position representation,
this position operator and the position vector are the same thing. They're not, in general,
in different representations. But certainly the p operator is a quantity that we know,
minus i h-bar times the gradient operator here. So this is going to be our proposed
form of the angular momentum operator L. And we can similarly write out component operators
Lx hat, Ly hat, and Lz hat if we want to.
So, analogously, we obtain these three operators. Here's the one for the x direction. It would
be y hat-- the y position operator-- times pz hat-- the z momentum operator-- minus z
hat-- the z position operator-- times py hat-- the y momentum operator. Of course, writing
that out, we get this expression here. And we can proceed similarly for the other two
coordinate directions-- for the momentum operator Ly, here, and Lz, with hats on each of these.
And each of these operators we could check is Hermitian. And so, correspondingly, the
operator L, itself, is Hermitian because it's just a sum of three Hermitian operators.
Now, these operators obey commutation relations, and I'm just going to state them here. Here's
the commutation relation between Lx and Ly, for example-- the commutator of Lx and Ly.
And you'll find that if you check that out-- it's quite straightforward to do so-- that
it's i h-bar times the Lz operator. And, similarly, the commutator of Ly and Lz operators is i
h-bar times the Lx operator, and the commutator of the Lz and the Lx operators is i h-bar
times the Ly operator.
Now, note, these commutators are telling us that, in fact, these operators are not going
to be, in general, sharing the same sets of eigenfunctions because these operators do
not commute. We can check that algebraically quite easily from the expressions we had just
written down.
And you can, if you want, write down these three commutation relations in one compact
form. You could write the cross product of L operator and L operator is i h-bar times
the L operator. That's not an expression that we use very much, by the way. We tend to work
directly with these. But this is a shorthand way of writing down all three of these, and
you can check that.
Now, unlike position and momentum operators, the different components of this angular momentum
operator, as I said, do not commute with one another. Their commutators are not, in general,
0. And so this is telling us that, though a particle can simultaneously have a well-defined
position in both the x and y directions, for example, or simultaneously have well-defined
momentum in both the x and y directions, a particle cannot, in general, simultaneously
have a well-defined angular momentum component in more than one of these directions.