The simplest way of looking at integration is as the area under a curve. So here's our
curve here, the function f of x as a function of x. And one way of thinking about the integral
and as the area under the curve is to imagine that we divide this area up into approximately
a collection of rectangles here. And all of these rectangles have got the same width delta
x, and they are approximately the right height, so that this collection of rectangles with
their areas added up, will give us approximately this total area under the curve.
So we add up these areas formally in a sum like this, and in the limit as we make this
delta x very small, this sum of all of these areas will give us the integral here. So it's
the limit as delta x tends to zero, as this delta x becomes very small, of the area of
all of these rectangles here. Notice in the integral that we have limits that we have
put on here. We're integrating from x1 to x2, just as we see on the graph here.
Now, the idea of the area under a curve is all right if the curve is always above zero.
We can extend this idea, however, to having the curve below zero, simply by using these
parts as negative areas. So negative area doesn't usually mean anything, but it can
mean something in the context of a curve like this. So when we come to work out the total
area under here, these parts make a positive contribution, and these parts make a negative
contribution. So we still add everything up, some positive, some negative to get our total
integral here.
And note, incidentally, that it's quite possible that because of this, the integral of some
function that is basically non-zero nearly everywhere, could still end up being zero,
if it happened at the area underneath the line equal to area above the horizontal line.
Obviously, for this curve that's not the case -- there's more positive area than there is
negative. But we can certainly get a situation, where our integral comes to zero.
In our notation for integrals, mostly we write our integral sign on one side and our infinitesimal
on the other, treating them sort of as if they were brackets, roundabout the thing that
we're going to integrate. And that's called the "integrand." And for those of you who
are into grammar, that comes from a Latin gerundive construction. And every time you
see this, it means "requiring to be." So integrand is requiring to be integrated.
Alternatively, instead of putting everything we want to integrate in between the integral
sign and the infinitesimal, we can have a notation where we don't do that and where
we might have the integrand actually sitting outside of here. And the convention then is
that if this variable is the same as the one in the infinitesimal, then everything with
that variable in it is integrated.
When we work with integrals, we mostly put limits roundabout them, so a definite lower
limit and a definite upper limit. And an integral written that way and with those attributes
is called a definite integral. So this is a definite integral, because it's from x1
to x2. Sometimes for formal purposes, we end up with an indefinite integral, where we have
not yet defined the limits. And that can be useful, because sometimes we can get analytic
results even though we have not yet defined the limits.
So for example here, the integral of x squared dx -- without defining any limits -- is 1/3x
cubed . But we have an additional constant that we have to leave in here, because we
don't know what this is, and we don't know what this constant is, because we have not
put limits on this integral. And that constant, which at the moment here in this expression
is still arbitrary, is called the constant of integration.
One very important concept is the relation between integration and differentiation. Basically,
they are inverse operations of one another. So specifically, if we take the integral from
a to b of df by dx, the derivative of f with respect to x, then the result of that is f
of b minus f of a. So the integration has undone the differentiation here and got us
back to values of the function.
Because we put limits on the integral, we have both of these values of the function
here, but the concept is still that the integration has basically undone the differentiation.
And this theorem, this statement here, is sometimes known as the fundamental theorem
of calculus. Sometimes , but not very often, the integral is referred to as the antiderivative,
because of this relation of the inverse operation going on here.