One property of differentiation that is almost so obvious we might not realize it, is what's
called linearity. If we take two function s-- u of x and v of x, the derivative of the
sum of these two functions is the sum of the derivatives. That is, d by dx of the sum of
u of x and v of x is du by dx plus dv by dx.
For example, if we take the function f of x equals x plus log x, and we rather trivially
split that into two parts, u of x equals the x, and v of x equals the log x. So du by dx
equals 1. d by the x of x is 1. And dv by dx is 1 over x. That's the derivative of log
x. So the derivative of this function f of x is du plus v by dx which is 1 plus 1 over
x.
Another attribute of an operation that is linear is that we can also multiply by a constant
in the following way. For some function u of x, the derivative of the product of some
constant a times the function is a times the derivative. Again, this is almost so obvious,
we might not realize this is a property. But it turns out that it is a rather important
property of a derivative. So d by dx of a times u is a times du by dx.
For example, for the function f of x that is a times the square root of x, which you
can also write in this way, a times x to the power 1/2, we split that rather trivially
into a and u of x. And so du by dx is 1/2 x to the minus 1/2. That's 1 over 2 root x.
So the derivative of f of x, a root x function up here, is a times du by dx, which is a over
2 root.
So I said, this property seems so obvious we might not realize it is a property. But
it turns out to be something rather important that not all kinds of operations like this
have. This is linearity, so let's just emphasize this point here. An operation, or function,
f of x, is a linear if, first of all, f of y plus z is the same thing as f of y plus
f of z. That's called linear superposition, or, sometimes, additivity condition.
And f of a times x is equal to a times f of x. And that's called multiplication by a constant,
or, formally, sometimes people call it homogeneity of degree 1. This second condition for linearity
might seem trivially obvious from the first condition for linearity. And actually, it
certainly is if a is any integer because then we could just write this as f of x added together
a times.
And it also turns out that we could prove that this would work for any rational value
here. We could use the first condition to prove the second. But for a real value, possibly
an irrational number, actually, this apparently does not follow from the first condition.
So we need to write it as a second condition.
So these two properties for linearity, f of y plus z is f of y plus f of z. And f of a
times x is a times f of x. Those are properties of a linear mapping or operation. And this
is the definition of a linear mapping or operation.
As I said, linearity may seem trivial and obvious. However, as I also said earlier,
it turns out to be very useful and important in quantum mechanics. The linearity there
goes beyond the simple example here of the linearity of differentiation, though it is
closely related to that. In the end, this idea of linearity means that the mathematics
and, indeed, the concepts of quantum mechanics, are in many ways quite simple and elegant
-- much more so than in many other branches of science and engineering.
So just to make the point here let's look at an example of a non-linear operation. The
function f of x equals x squared is not a linear operation. And we can check that quite
easily with looking at one of the conditions f of y plus z would be y plus z all squared.
And that is y squared plus z squared plus 2 times yz.
But f of y plus f of z would be y squared plus z squared. So for this particular function,
f of x plus y is not, in general, equal to f of x plus f of y. Now, this is true here
for a function, but the derivative is an operation which also has this same property of linearity.
There are many other kinds of operations, however, that do not. And this function here
is just one example of a particular kind of operation that is not linear.
Let's look at our next important rule for differentiation, which is called the product
rule. If we have two functions, u of x and v of x, the derivative of the product of these
two functions is d by dx of u times v is u dv by dx plus v du by dx. For example, if
we take the function x squared times sine x, we can split this rather obviously into
two parts -- x squared and sine x, each of which we know to differentiate, to take the
derivative.
So du by dx simply is 2x. That's taking the 2 down here and reducing the power by one.
And d by dx of sine of x -- that's dv by dx -- is equal to cos x. So the derivative of
the product of these two, which is our function f of x up here, is x squared cos x plus 2x
sine x.
The next of our rules is the quotient rule. For two functions u of x and v of x, again,
the derivative of the ratio, or quotient, is v times du by dx minus u times dv by dx
all over v squared. So we have u in the top line and v on the bottom. v du by dx minus
u dv by dx over v squared.
So for example, let's take the function x cubed over 1 plus x squared. We split this
into u of x, on the top line, x cubed, and v of x being the bottom line, 1 plus x squared.
So du by dx, that is the 3x squared, the derivative of x cubed. And dv by dx, well, derivative
of one is just zero -- it's not changing with x. The derivative of x squared is 2x.
So the derivative of the ratio of u over v is 1 plus x squared times 3x squared minus
x cubed times 2x all over 1 plus x squared all squared. And we can simplify that a bit.
We can move things around and write it in this simpler form -- 3x squared, 1 plus x
squared, and minus x cubed times 2x. We've still got to simplify that one or rewrite
it. And finally, we can rewrite that one as well to get 2x to the power of 4 on the top
line in addition there. And this 1 plus x squared all squared on the bottom. If you
like, you can separate that out into two terms, canceling 1 plus x squared that was up on
the top line here.
The final one of our rules here is the chain rule. So if we have two functions, f of y
and g of x, the derivative of the function of a function can be split into a product.
This expression here, f of g of x, is a function of a function. And what we're seeing here
is that the derivative of f of g of x is the product df by dg times dg by dx.
So let's look at a few examples here. First of all, let's think of the function h of x
is 1 plus x squared all squared. We're going to split this into g of x, which is 1 plus
x squared, and then f of y, which is y squared.
We could also think of that as f of g is equal to g squared. It makes no difference. So dg
by dx, well, that's straightforward. The derivative of 1 plus x squared is simply 2x. And the
derivative of g squared with respect to g is simply 2g. So dh by dx is equal to 2 times
1 plus x squared -- that's the 2g -- times 2x. And that, altogether, is 4x times 1 plus
x squared.
Another example, let's take e to the ax, exponential of ax. We can split that, rather trivially,
into ax and exp of g, or e to the g. So, dg by dx, well, that's easy, that's just a. df
by dg is just e to the g because the derivative of e to the g is e to the g.
So putting that all together, here is our df by dg here. That is just exponential of
g. So that's exponential of ax multiplied by dg by dx -- well that's the a. So we get,
changing the order in the multiplication, a times exponential of ax.
And another example. Let's take this function here, exp of ax squared, split that into ax
squared. And again, e to the g. So dg by dx is 2ax. And df by dg, as before, is e to the
g. And so, d by dx of this function e to the ax squared is e to the g, that's e to the
ax squared, times 2ax. So again, changing the multiplication order around first, for
elegance, that's 2ax e to the ax squared.