When we want to add many different numbers together, it's convenient to have a notation
that saves us some space in writing that.
For example, suppose we wanted to add a set of numbers, a1, a2, a3, and a4. We could,
of course, just write that sum as a1 plus a2 plus a3 plus a4. Or we could use the summation
notation.
The summation notation is based on the use of the Greek sigma, upper case sigma, which
has an S, of course, in Greek. And one way of writing that would be to say that the sum,
S here, is the sum from j equals 1 to j equals 4 of the terms aj. So that would be a1 plus
a2 plus a3 plus a4.
Or an alternative and completely equivalent notation would be this one here, where we
listed the 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the bottom line. Or maybe we just might write this with the
ellipsis in the middle.
If the range of j is obvious and we want to save ourselves some writing, we might just
specify that the summation is over j, and we already know the range of j that matters.
j here is what's called an index. So the j on the bottom of the numbers here is an index,
the same index as in this summation sign.
Incidentally, the plural of index can be either indexes or indices. And you'll hear both of
these used in math and science. For the index of a book perhaps, we only use indexes if
we have several books with different indexes. But as I said, in math and science we will
also use this term indices.
As an example of the summation notation, let's look at the arithmetic series. If we have
a set of numbers that are spaced by some constant amount from one to the other, we can call
that an arithmetic progression or an arithmetic sequence.
And for example, we might have a way of writing this, which would be classic for the terms
in an arithmetic series, where the nth term in the series is the first term in the series,
plus n minus 1 times the separation between the terms.
For example, the numbers 4, 7, 10, and 13 are all equally spaced by an amount 3. And
in this case, obviously, by definition, a1 would be 4, a2 would be 7, a3 would be 10,
and a4 would be 13. And this number d is simply 3.
So a1 is 4, and the next term has the second term -- was 2 minus 1, here. That's 1 times
d. That's 3. So we're adding 3 onto 4 to get 7, and so on.
Now, when we add all these terms together, that becomes what's called a series. So when
we take the terms in a progression or a sequence and add them together, we get a series. And
in this case, obviously, if we add up these terms, simple arithmetic here, we get 34.
We could also write that as the sum from j equals 1 to 4 of the terms aj.
Now, note something that is very common in using these kinds of indices here, which is
that we may change the index. So here, I wrote the expression with n. Here I've written the
expression with j instead.
That's very common in the use of indices. They're what's called dummy variables. And
we can change them about as we see fit. Change the letters, it makes no difference. So it
would be no difference in this summation if we wrote n equals 1 to 4, or j equals 1 to
4. We'd just have to remember to use n in here rather than j.
Now in this case here, we've also said, well, there are four terms in the series. So we've
introduced another variable able here m. And m is equal to 4 for this particular series
that we're summing. So we can also say we're summing from j equals 1 to m of this set of
terms in the sequence to get the series.
In this particular case, the answer to that summation is m times the sum of the first
and last terms divided by 2. This is the average term that you have in the sequence. We can
use this formula instead to add all these up, and we still get the answer 34.
And this particular expression that I've put in the box here is a standard general result
for the sum of arithmetic progressions of sequences. It's the answer to the arithmetic
series -- what does it all add up to?
As a second example, we can look at the geometric series. In this case, we're looking at a series
where there's a constant ratio between successive terms in the sequence. And we call that, as
I said, a geometric progression or sequence. In this case the nth term is given by the
first term multiplied by this ratio, r, to the power of n minus 1.
So for example, the numbers 3, 6, 12, and 24 correspond with our a1 equals 3, a2 equals
6, and so on, to a progression like this, where the successive terms in the progression
or sequence are a factor of two larger than the previous one. So r is 2. 6 is 2 times
3. And we have four terms all together in this particular sequence. And we're going
to call that m equals 4. And adding these all together gives the series or the sum of
the terms. So explicitly adding them up conventionally gives us 3 plus 6 plus 12 plus 24, which is
45. We can write that using summation notation, from j equals 1 to 4 of aj.
Note again, we're using a dummy index here. We've used j in this expression. We've used
n up here. But it doesn't matter which of those indices we use. And we can also write
this from j equals 1 to m with this explicit formula in here. Again, with j used instead
of the index, n.
The result of that summation, the general result for geometric series, is this expression
here, a1 times 1 minus r to the power m on the top over 1 minus r on the bottom.
And of course, that gives us the same answer when we work it out using this formula. r
to the power 4 is 2 to the power 4. That's a 16. And when we use this formula then, we
get 45 also. And just to emphasize that this is a useful general result for the sum of
a geometric sequence or a geometric series here, I put a box around this result.
The summation notation becomes even more useful when we have to deal with more complicated
situations. We can extend the summation notation, for example, to handle the case where we might
have two different lists of numbers, a1 through a4, and b1 through b3, where we might want
to do something complicated like adding up all of the products. So a1 times b1 plus a1
times b3 plus a1 times b3 plus a2 times b1, and so on.
Then we can use the following notation. Instead of writing out all of this set here, we can
have two summations, one nested inside the other. So in this case, we might imagine we
perform this summation first. For each value of j, we perform this summation over all of
the k's, from 1 to 3. So this expression and this expression with all of these numbers
here are exactly equivalent to one another.
And we remember that the order of addition does not matter. So we can add these up in
any order we like. So it doesn't matter whether we put the j summation first and the k summation
next to it. This would mean we're performing the k summation first, and then performing
the j summation.
Or we could do that in the other order. Or we can, if we know what the ranges of j and
k are, we may not have to bother to write them down. And sometimes, just to save space,
we may bring the j and k up nearer to the axis here.
Now, another extremely useful notation is the factorial notation. It's quite often the
case that we need a convenient way of writing the product of successive integers. So we
might be multiplying 1 times 2 times 3 times 4. Well, we have a simple way of writing that
down. We write it as 4 factorial. And this is the exclamation point or the exclamation
mark on your keyboard.
The notation is obvious for most other cases -- 20 factorial, 36 factorial, and so on.
But one special case is worth mentioning. It turns out to be very useful to define 0
factorial as 1. There are various formulae that come up when we're working with factorials.
And in those formulae, it turns out that choosing 0 factorial to be 1 means the formulae are
even more useful.
One final notation we should mention is the product notation. This is like the summation
notation, but instead of summing a set of terms, we are taking the product of a set
of terms.
So generally, when we want to write the product of four successive terms like this, for example,
a1 times a2 times a3 times a4, where those are specific numbers, then we can explicitly
write them either multiplying them all out, obviously, or we can use this product notation.
And just as we used the Greek S, or sigma, upper case sigma, for the summation notation,
so for the product notation we used the Greek uppercase pi. Let me make a nice big one here,
just as we did for the sigma in this summation.
And otherwise, the notation is similar. But we must remember that this is the product
of all of the terms. So the product from j equals 1 to j equals 4 of aj, of course, is
explicitly this.
And for example, for all the integers, n greater than or equal to 1, at least, n factorial
would be the product from p equals 1 to n of the number p, in each particular case in
the sequence.