To start our discussion here, we're going to have to talk about coordinate axes. In
ordinary geometry, we have three axes, x, y, and z. So here is the x. Here is the y.
And here is the z. All at right angles to one another. These are typically called Cartesian
axes, from the French philosopher Rene Descartes.
And in general, lines or directions that are at right angles to one another are called
orthogonal. So all three of these axes are at right angles to one another, or orthogonal.
And the idea of orthogonality is a concept that we are going to generalize later on.
But we'll start with it here, just as a geometrical idea of things being at right angles.
Now, these axes have a particular property in the way that they are oriented with respect
to one another. If you imagine, for example, that you point your thumb of your right hand
along the x direction. And you point your index finger, or first finger, of your right
hand along a y direction, away from you, for example. And then you put your middle finger
at right angles, approximately, to both of these. You have what are called right-handed
axes. So this would be the thumb, the index finger, and the middle finger.
Now, no matter how you rotate your hand or bend your wrist, the relative orientation
of these three axes remains the same. Let me show you what I mean. With my right hand
here, my thumb pointing upwards is the x-axis. My index, or first finger, pointing forwards
is the y-axis. My third, or middle, finger pointing perpendicular to these two at right
angles, pointing out from my palm here, is the z-axis.
Now, it does not matter how I rotate my right hand. These still remain in the same relative
orientation. And they are always right-handed axes.
If, on the other hand, you use your left hand with your thumb along x, your index finger
pointing away from you along y, and your middle finger at right angles to both of those with
your left hand, you will get what are called left-handed axes.
And no rotation of these axes will ever turn them into right-handed axes. You can flex
your left wrist as much as you want and move your arm about, but the axes that you get
in this way with the thumb, index finger, and middle finger of the left hand are always
left-handed axes.
We will use right-handed axes all the time, basically, unless for some reason we state
the opposite of that. Here now, with my left hand, I'll do the same kind of thing as before.
But with the thumb on the x-axis, the index finger on the y-axis, and the middle finger
on the z-axis of my left hand now.
I can rotate these as much as I want, and they still, of course, remain in the same
relative orientation. But no matter how I rotate these, they will never turn into those
axes. No rotation of left-handed axes will give me right-handed axes.
Now, left-handed axes look left-handed to you and to me. Right-handed axes look right-handed
to you and to me. If, however, you look in a mirror, left-handed axes turn into right-handed
axes. And right-handed axes into the left-handed axes.
Given that we have these coordinate axes, we want to use them to do something. And one
of the main things we want to do, of course, is to express position of some point in space.
So we take this point P here. And what we do to express that on the Cartesian right
angled axes is we essentially project the point P onto the various axes.
So we can project it over here onto the y-axis or over here onto the x-axis or over here
onto the z-axis. And the resulting projections, the Xp, the Yp, and the Zp, relative to the
origin of this coordinate system, give us these coordinates here for the point P. We
can also express those coordinates in terms of these three numbers, Xp, Yp, and Zp, inside
these parentheses here.
Now, a vector is something with a magnitude, such as a length. This vector here has a length.
And a direction. You see this vector is drawn as an arrow with a direction that the arrow
is pointing in. Usually for vectors, we write them in a bold font.
Sometimes, when we're writing them by hand, it's not easy to be clear that we're using
a bold font. So we can underline them, or we can put this little arrow over the top.
And the vector here is shown as an arrow with both a length to it and a direction, as given
by the arrow.
A vector could be, for example, the distance from point A to point B here. And the direction
that we have to go between A and B. What direction would we have to walk in and what distance
would we have to walk to get directly from A to B.
A vector could also be a force. A force is something with a magnitude of it, how hard
you're pushing, and a direction that you're pushing in. So the magnitude in the vector
here is the length, and the direction is the direction you're pushing in, the arrow direction
here.
A vector could also be a velocity. So a velocity is something that has got a magnitude. It's
how fast you're going. What speed are you going? What speed is showing on your speedometer?
And it also has a direction.
What direction are you driving your car in? Are you driving it north? Are you driving
it west? Are you driving it east? The direction is given by the arrow and the magnitude of
the speed is given by the length of this arrow. That's a way we could represent velocity as
a vector.
Now, if we're calling these arrows vectors, what do we call ordinary numbers to get a
distinction between the two of them? Ordinary numbers we call scalars. That's a number that
has no direction associated with it. So the distance itself is a scalar. How hard you're
pushing is a scalar. The speed that you are going at is a scalar.
Scalars we write in ordinary fonts, without any bold or without any underlines or without
any arrows. And usually, when we're printing them, we put them in an italic font, which
is a slightly sloped font here.
Now, a vector has components in different directions. It's one way of expressing a vector.
And if we use our Cartesian style of axes here, all at right angles, then we can talk
about the components of the vector, Gx, Gy, and Gz, which are the projections of the vector
along these three directions. You can see here we're dropping verticals just as we did
when we were talking about a point in space.
We can define vectors of unit length along each of the coordinate directions. So, for
example, i is a vector of unit length along the x direction. j is a vector of unit length
along the y direction. And k is a vector of unit length along the z direction.
Then, we can write the component of this vector as a vector itself. So the projection of my
vector G, which is going to be this line in here, onto the x-axis, we can think of as
a vector. It has a length, Gx, and it has a direction given by the unit vector i along
the x direction.
Similarly, the projection of our vector G here onto the z direction is something of
length Gz and direction given by k. And that could be this green vector here.
And finally, the projection of our vector along the y-axis, we can show to be Gy, this
distance here along the axis, times the direction, which is the vector j, the unit vector along
the y-axis.
So the sum of these three components of the vector gives us the total vector. So we make
the final vector up by adding its components together.