A differential equation, then, is something that involves derivatives of some function.
So for example, this here is a differential equation because we've got the derivative
on the left, and in this case, something else on the right. And this particular equation
is dy by dx is equal to a times y, where a is some real number. The solution to this
equation is y is equal to capital A times the exponential small e times x, where A is
some arbitrary constant.
In general, with differential equations, it's easy to verify a solution, to figure out that
something is a solution, but it's much harder to find them often. So we can easily check
that putting in this expression, A exponential of small e times x, is indeed a solution of
this equation. But just by looking at a differential equation, it may not be obvious what that
solution is.
Now, that particular equation is an example of what we call a first order differential
equation. That means that there are no derivatives here in this equation that are higher than
first order, so we only have a first order derivative here. There's no second order derivative
or anything higher than that.
And the solution here, y equals capital A times the exponential of small e times x,
has one what we call an undetermined constant A. That is, the solution, as we said, will
work for any value of the constant A. And that's a characteristic of a first order differential
equation, that the solution has one undetermined constant. And when we have that undetermined
constant in here, we call this a general solution of the equation.
And the way that we fix undetermined constants is by putting in other conditions, typically
boundary conditions. So let's choose a specific value for our constant small a in our differential
equation. Let's choose that to be 0.4. So we're now saying, we have a ramp of some kind
with a slope dy by dx, which is equal to 0.4 times y.
The general solution has to be, then, y is equal to capital A, some undetermined constant,
times the exponential of 0.4 times x. And I've sketched that here, but you'll note that
I have not yet been able to put a scale, especially on the vertical axis. I could have put one
in the horizontal axis, but I cannot yet put a scale on the vertical axis because I don't
know what A is, capital A.
So let's presume that, for some reason, we know that at x equals 0, y is equal to 1.5.
We know the height of the ramp at the position x is equal to 0. Well, the exponential of
0 is 1. In other words, at x equals 0, this part, the exponential of 0.4 times x, is 1.
But also, when x is equal to 0, we know that y is equal to 1 and 1/2. Well, that tells
us that capital A has to be 1 and 1/2, 1.5.
So therefore, we have managed to fix capital A now, and we have our specific solution,
y is equal to 1.5 times the exponential of 0.4 times x. And as a result, we can now put
scales on this axis. In particular, on the vertical axis, we now have a specific scale.
And you'll note that at x equals 0, y is equal to 1.5.
Suppose, instead, that with the same kind of ramp, that is, dy by dx is equal to 0.4y--
so we have our same general solution here, but still an undetermined constant in it,
A-- suppose that we know instead that at x equals 0, the slope of the ramp is 0.6. So
we know the slope here of the ramp at x equals 0.
Now, dy by dx, we can figure that out. Of course, it's just 0.4 times A times the exponential
of 0.4 times x. That's the same thing as we have up here. Then at x equals 0, we know
that the exponential of 0, 0.4 times 0, is 1.
So we know that our slope, which is to be 0.6, also has to equal 0.4 times A times 1.
That is, it has to equal 0.4 times A. So therefore, A is 0.6 divided by 0.4, which, again, is
1.5. I happen to have chosen the slope, so I get the same answer here. And now, again,
I can put scales on my axes, especially the vertical one.
Now, we've seen two different types of boundary conditions. Boundary conditions that specify
the value of a function at some position or boundary, that was the first example we looked
at here, are called Dirichlet boundary conditions. So this is a French-pronounced word, name,
Dirichlet. And boundary conditions that specify the derivative or the slope of a function
at some position or boundary are called Neumann boundary conditions. So this is a German-pronounced
word, Neumann boundary conditions.
Now, let's look at a version of the equation where, instead of having a as a real number
in here, we have an imaginary number, i times b. So b is a real number, but i times b, obviously,
is imaginary. Well, it's actually quite straightforward to solve this equation. It's solved exactly
the same way as we did before. It turns out it does not matter whether this constant in
here is real or imaginary or even complex.
And so with the imaginary constant in here, the general solution to this equation is of
the same form, actually. Instead of a in here, we've got i times b. So the solution of this
equation is capital A, an undetermined constant, times the exponential of ib times x, which
is the same thing, using Euler's formula, as A times cos bx plus i sin bx.
Incidentally, although the exponential of ibx, multiplied by an arbitrary constant,
is a solution of this equation, neither the cosine of bx nor the sine of bx is a solution
to this equation. So this equation has a solution that's sort of a complex oscillation that's
going on here, but an ordinary real oscillation is not a solution. This particular equation
will come up many times in quantum mechanics, and it's a very important kind of equation
there. And it's important to know that the exponential of ibx is a solution, but neither
cosine bx on its own nor sine bx on its own is a solution.