The inverse operation of raising something to a power is called taking the logarithm,
or often just taking the log for short. So with logarithms, we need to specify something.
We need to specify, what is the number that we'd been raising to a power so we know what
to talk about when we're going backwards through that process
So for example, we had 2 the power of 3 is 8. 2 times 2 times 2 is equal to 8. Then,
the logarithm to the base 2 of 8 is 3. It's the power to which we have to raise 2 in order
to get 8. So we can generalize here. If we take a chain of n numbers g multiplied together,
then g times g times g all together n times, n different g's here, then we would call that,
of course, g to the n. Then, n is the log to the base g of g to the power n.
That is, n is the power to which we have to raise the number g to get the answer g to
the power n. Now, so far, we've just talked about raising numbers to integer powers. And
the same thing has been true so far of our discussion of logarithms and working backwards
from that. But we can actually generalize to non-integers. We don't have to restrict
these powers to just be integers n.
So suppose we've got some number b. Then, saying that a is equal to log to the base
g of b means that g to the a is equal to b. One important restriction here is that we
can only take logarithms of positive non-zero numbers. A log of 0 is not defined, and the
log of negative numbers we can't define using our real numbers here.
Now, of course, if we are multiplying 2 to the power 2 by 2 to the power 3, and we could
write it out here for the integers, that would give us 32. But it would also be 2 to the
power 5. It doesn't matter with the parentheses whether we leave them in in multiplications.
So we see that multiplying 2 to the power 2 by 2 to the power 3 gives us 2 the power
2 plus 3, which of course is 2 to the power 5.
So in multiplying here, we have added the exponents. Generalizing to non-integers now,
we can generalize and say g to the power a times g to the power b is g to the power a
plus b. So if we write that some number capital A is equal to g to the power small a, that
means that log to the base g of A, capital A, is equal to small a.
And if capital B is equal to g to the power small b, then log to the base g of capital
B is equal to small b. Then, the log to the base g of this product A times B is log to
the base g of g to the power a, because A is just g to the power little a times g to
the power little b, because uppercase B is just g to the power little b.
And we know since g to the power a times g to the power b is equal to g to the power
a plus b, then what we have in here must be what we have over in these parentheses. And
we know by definition that log to the base g of g to the power a plus b is just equal
to a plus b. But that is equal to the log to the base g of capital A plus the log to
the base g of capital B.
So multiplying numbers is equivalent to adding their logarithms. And that was one of the
main reasons why logarithms were used to do calculations for many years. If you had log
tables, you merely had to do additions in order to multiply numbers.
When we use logarithms for ordinary calculations, we typically use logarithms to the base 10.
Base 10 logarithms are very often used by engineers in expressing power ratios. So though
we don't really need to do logarithm-based calculations anymore for the sake of doing
real numerical analysis, we do use them quite a lot.
Because the logarithms to the base 10 are very convenient when we're talking about amplifiers
and losses in communication channels and things like that. And in practice, we use a unit
called decibels, abbreviated to small d capital B. And the decibels are 10 times the logarithm
to the base 10 of the power ratio.
So for example, suppose we had an amplifier whose output power P out is 100 times larger
than its input power P in. The gain in decibels would be expressed as 10 times the logarithm
to the base 10 of the gain of the amplifier, the output power divided by the input power.
So since the output power divided by the input power is 100, and log to the base 10 of 100
is simply 2, because 10 squared is 100, then our gain in decibels here is 10 times log
to the base 10 of 100, which is 10 times 2, which is 20 decibels.
So another good example would be an amplifier with a gain of 2 noting that log to the base
10 of 2 is approximately equal to 0.301. Then a gain of times 2 in decibels is 10 log to
the base 10 of 2, which is approximately equal to 3 decibels.
Most engineers will use the idea of 3 decibels as another way of expressing a factor of 2.
As I said, although we don't really need to use logarithms to do calculations anymore,
it turns out to be very convenient to have decibels to work with as units when we're
analyzing things like amplifier chains. Because if we vary these different amplifiers and
vary these different loss factors as we go through some cable or the like, we simply
add the decibels up to understand the overall gain or loss to the system.
Of course losses, which would be ratios of numbers that are smaller than 1, give us negative
numbers of decibels when we take the logarithms. So logarithms of numbers less than 1 are negative
numbers.
Now, it turns out to be quite useful and important to be able to change the bases of the logarithms
that we're working with. So for example, suppose that log to the base 10 of some number b is
a. Could we figure out how to write this as a log to the base 2, for example, instead?
So the fact that log to the base 10 of b is equal to a means that b is equal to 10 to
the power a.
Now, by definition, 10 is just 2 to the power of log to the base 2 of 10. That's what log
to the base 2 of 10 means. So our number b here, which is 10 to the power a, is 2 to
the power log to the base 2 of 10 to the power a. And we know that if we're raising a power
to a power, we just multiply the two of them. So b is equal to 2 to the power log to the
base 2 of 10 times a.
So log to the base 2 of b, which we can do here-- we know b, and we've got it expressed
as a power of 2-- is therefore just this exponent here. That is, it's log to the base 2 of 10
times a. But a, we figured out a long time ago by definition at the top, is just log
to the base 10 of b.
So log to the base 2 of b is log to the base 2 of 10 times log to the base 10 of b. We
can generalize this, and drop the parentheses here with the logs and the multiplication
sign, and say that log to the base c of b is log to the base c of d times log to the
base d of b. Notice that the d's are the same number in two different positions in the middle
of this expression here. So it makes it kind of easy to remember.
Log to the base c of b is log to the base c of d times log to the base d of b. When
we're talking about logarithms, sometimes the loose notation is that the logarithm written
just as log means log to the base 10. For example, that's often the case on a calculator
keyboard. This is not a very reliable notation, however.
Another common base of logarithms is logarithms to the base 2, which we've already looked
at. We would write those as logs to the base 2 here. And they're important, because we
use binary numbers quite a lot, for example, in computer science.
Fundamental physical science and mathematics however almost always use logarithms to the
base e, where e is this rather strange and irrational number here. It goes on and on
and on. It's about 2.718. And it's called the base of the natural logarithms. And why
we want to work with logarithms to that base will become clearer as we go further on. The
mathematics becomes particularly elegant if we work with logarithms to the base e.
Let's look at some notations associated with the use of this number e, the base of the
natural logarithms. So logarithms to the base e are called natural logarithms. And we could
write them like this. That's perfectly correct. And that notation is used. Sometimes also
we may see people just using the notation log.
An unambiguous and short notation is this notation here, which is ln. So the letter
l here we can think of as being a logarithm, and the letter n as being associated with
natural. So natural logarithms use the notation ln.
Now, this number e, of course, is a mathematical number. But the letter e in physics is often
used to represent the charge on an electron. And we don't want to get confused. Also, since
we will very often be taking exponents of the number e, we want to avoid having superscript
characters all over the place.
So to avoid using the letter e, and to avoid these superscript characters, instead of writing
e to the x, which is still perfectly legal and perfectly all right, we will try instead
to use this notation here, exp of x, or the exponential, the exponential function, e to
the x, exactly equivalent to this notation here, exp brackets with x in the middle.
Let's just have a look at these functions. Here's what the exponential function looks
like, or e to the x. You can see that as we go to larger negative arguments, it gets closer
and closer to the horizontal axis. It is called, therefore, a function that asymptotes to the
x-axis. And for larger positive arguments, it grows faster and faster and faster.
The logarithm, the inverse operation of that, is a function that grows rather slowly in
the forward direction. The logarithm of 1 is 0. And as we go below the number one, taking
logarithms of numbers smaller than 1, the logarithm function becomes larger and larger
and larger in negative numbers. And it gets infinitely large as we get arbitrarily close
to 0 with the x. So for smaller positive arguments, it becomes arbitrarily large and negative.
So let's just look at some formulas which turn out to be very useful in manipulating
exponentials and logarithms. And all of these can be deduced from the discussions that we've
had above. First of all, the product of two exponentials is just the exponential of the
sum of these arguments. The log of the product of two numbers, the natural log, is like for
any other logarithm the sum of the logs of each of the numbers.
1 over exp of a, 1 over e to the x, is, of course, e to the minus x, or exponential minus
a. The log of 1 over a number is minus the log of the number. Because this is a number
to a negative power. That's where the minus sign really comes from.
And this is true for all logarithms, not just the natural ones. The exponential of the natural
logarithm of a is of course just a. And the logarithm of the exponential of a is also
just a.