So let's look at how linear equations and matrices are related to one another. Suppose,
we have the equations for two straight lines. So here's two equations for straight lines.
A11x plus A12y equals c1.
And here's another one, possibly with different numbers here, for the A12 and the A22, and
the c2. You might be more used to this form for the equation of a straight line, but these
are actually equivalent. We could write this equation here as being the same as that one,
if we made the following choices-- this for m and this here for the c.
Anyway, with these equivalent forms here, we will work with these ones instead, because
they're going to relate better to our matrix ideas. And we note that we can rewrite these
two equations here in this matrix form. So for example, if we multiply this top row here
by this vector, we get A11x plus A12y equal to c1. And similarly, for at the lower row
here, A21x plus A22y equals c2.
So this matrix form here is entirely equivalent to these two equations. Or we could also write
this in the summation form of matrix vector multiplication, if we write b1 instead of
x, and b2 instead of y. Then we can write these two linear equations in this form, the
summation form.
Now, when we have linear equations in a matrix vector form here, then formally the solution,
if it exists, is quite simple in matrix form. That is if we happen to be able to work out
the inverse of this matrix A, we have solved the equations. So to see that, if we multiply
both sides here by A to the minus 1 and we remember that A to the minus 1 times A by
definition is the identity matrix, and the identity matrix times anything is just what
we started with, then, formally then, we have the solution that is we have the intersection
point xy of these two lines in terms of the inverse of this matrix and these two coefficients
that we started out with. So solving linear equations and inverting a matrix are the same
operation.
So there's a very important attribute of a determinant. If the determinant of a matrix
is not zero, then the matrix has an inverse. And if a matrix has an inverse, the determinant
of the matrix is not zero. So a non-zero determinant is a necessary and sufficient condition for
a matrix to be invertible. Hence, we see that the determinant can really help us with our
linear algebra. So what is the determinant?
The determinant of a matrix can be written using one of two notations. So this is one
notation here-- determinant of A, this d-e-t. And this is the other notation, where we write
out the matrix, essentially, in terms of its elements, but instead of square brackets,
we have just these straight lines. And these straight lines here do not mean the modulus
of the matrix or some other similar use we might previously made of these straight lines
on either side.
There are two complete formulas we could write down for calculating the determinant. Those
two formulas are equivalent to one another. One of them is Leibniz's formula. And the
other is Laplace's formula. There are also many numerical techniques for calculating
determinants. And we're not going to give any of these general methods here, although,
we will give an informal version of Leibniz's formula as we go forward here.
So let's look at the determinant of a 2 by 2 matrix. So for our 2 by 2 matrix, which
we can write out here like this in its determinant form, the answer to the determinant is A11A22
minus A12A21, that is we're adding the product on the leading diagonal of these two numbers
here and subtracting the product on the other diagonal, that is the product of these two
numbers here.
For a 3 by 3 matrix, it gets a little more complicated. And there are two rather different
ways of looking at this. So for our 3 by 3 matrix, we can write the determinant with
these two notations here. And one way of multiplying this out is shown here. So that would be A11
times A22 times A33 minus A23 times A32. And then that term has a positive sign.
And then the next term we would evaluate would be A12 times A21 times A33 and minus A23 times
A31. So A12 multiplying all of this here. And we see, we're always getting a positive
contribution and a negative contribution. And this term also has a negative sign overall.
And finally, for our third term down here, we've got A13 times the sum of A21 times A32
minus A22 times A31. And this term here would have a positive sign.
If we take the expression we just were looking at and wrote it out in one line, and then
multiplied out all of the terms in the brackets, we would see the following. We would see a
collection of terms, each with three elements multiplied together, some with minus signs
and some with positive signs-- there's another minus sign. Each term contains a different
element from each row. So this term here that we're looking at which is this one up here
contains the second element from row one, the third element from row two, and the first
element from row three.
And if you look at all of these different terms here, you will find they have the same
characteristic. They contain a different element from each different row. And the elements
in each term are never from the same column. That's kind of confusing when we look at it
in words, but as we look at this a bit more graphically, it will become somewhat clearer
what we're talking about.
We do always have one element from each row and each column in each of these terms. So
there's an element from row one here, an element from row two, an element from row three; there's
an element from column two, there's an element from column one, there's an element from column
three. So this suggests to us what the general form of a determinant really is. And we'll
illustrate this with the 3 by 3 determinant again.
So this form that we have written out here, as we said, contains every possible term with
one element from each row, with each element being from different column. And this is a
general property of determinants. To understand how to construct a determinant, it only remains
for us now to find the sign of the different terms we have to put in. And again, this becomes
clearer, when we look at it graphically.
So to do this, what we're going to do is we're going to count the number of row swaps we
have to make-- this also works for column swaps-- to get all the elements in the term
onto the leading diagonal. And if that number is even, the number of these row swaps or
columns swaps we have to do, the sign is positive, and if that number is odd, the sign is negative.
OK so understanding that in words is really very hard, but let's look at it, as I said,
graphically.
So let's look at this term here, one of the terms in our chain of different terms that
we have to add and subtract to get the determinant. So that term is the one that corresponds to
these black numbers in our expression here. And I've made all the other elements gray
in this diagonal.
So if we swap this row and this row, then we find that we've managed to get all of these
black elements on a diagonal. So we can say that in order to get this term so that all
of the elements are lying on the diagonal, we have to perform one row swap. One is an
odd number, so the sign of this term in the determinant is going to be negative.
On the other hand, for this term here-- here it is before we do any row swaps-- we've got
one of our elements here, one of them here, and one of them here-- if we swap these two
rows around, then we get the determinant into this form, but that still does not have all
the elements down a leading diagonal. But one more row swap, swapping these two rows
about will achieve that for us. And here we are.
So performing two rows swaps will end up with all of these terms that we want to multiply
together all lying on the leading diagonal. So we had to perform two row swaps in this
case. Two is an even number, so the sign of this term in our overall sum will be positive.
And this is how we make up the determinant-- we consider every one of the possible ways
in which we can choose one element from the first row, a different columns element from
the second row, and a different columns element from the third row, and so on, if we have
more rows in our determinant. And then we figured out the sign of each of these terms
by figuring out the row swaps. And the answer to these rows swaps is unique, by the way.
There are many different ways in which we can do the row swaps in order to get the answer
sometimes, but the number of them would remain the same. And incidentally, this way of looking
at the determinant is actually Leibniz's determinant formula. So I won't try to write it out for
you-- it's not very clear when you write it out either. But thinking about it in this
graphical fashion lets us see what the formula really is.