We're going to start here by looking at the derivative for some function, y of x. Now
here's our function. It's a curve, moves along here. y is a function of x. And the first
derivative is the slope, or the gradient, or the rate of change of y as we change x.
Now what we imagine is that we're going to make some small change in x, which we'll call
dx. And as a result, we're going to get some small change in y, near some point, for example,
here. And we are going to define that ratio as the derivative. We can write it with this
notation with the little prime in here, the little superscript prime, or we can write
it with this ratio notation. And that ratio notation is called a Leibniz notation.
So let's look a little bit more closely at the first derivative round about some specific
point. So we'll think about this point x1. We've got a region around here. I've sketched
a dashed line, here. And a notation we're going to use at this part, here, is to say
that this derivative at the point x1 we can also write in the Leibniz notation by putting
a line on the right hand side and marking x1 down at the bottom. We will also use that
notation for something different later on, so this notation is a little ambiguous.
The derivative, the value of it, is the slope of this tangent line. That's the one that
just touches the curve at this point and is parallel to it when it touches it. And it
is mathematically equal, the slope, to this tangent, delta y over delta x.
We could look at some other point, over here. We would have a different value of dy by dx.
In this case, the slope is, obviously, going in the other direction, for example.
So let's look more closely at the first derivative and let's define what we mean by that. So
what we're going to do, for the moment, is we're not going to start out by looking at
the slope of the black line, here. But we're going to look at the slope of this upper line,
this orange line. And we can write down what that slope is.
So the change in y as we go from this point to that point -- well, we can write down what
that is, mathematically. This point, here, is the point x minus delta x over 2, so x1
minus delta x over 2. And this point, here, is the point x1 plus delta x over 2. So by
definition, the value of y at this point is y of x1 plus delta x over 2. That's just what
we mean by y of x.
And similarly, down here, the value of y is the value y of x1 minus delta x over 2. We're
going halfway in both directions, here. So these are just, by definition, that's what
we mean by the function, y of x.
And so the height, here, of this portion is just this number minus this number. So that's
our delta y. And our delta x, of course, is just whatever we chose it to be.
So the slope of this orange line, this upper line here on the curve, is, by definition,
delta y -- that's the difference in the values of y -- divided by the difference in values
of x. This is delta y over delta x. That's the slope of the orange line.
Now, let's look at what happens here as we reduce the size of delta x. We've reduced
the size of delta x here. And you can see what is happening is that the orange line,
the upper one of this pair, is getting closer and closer to the black line. And we're seeing,
therefore, that this orange tangent line is becoming closer to the slope of the black
tangent line.
So what we say is that in the limit as we make delta x very small, in fact, we say in
the limit as delta x tends to 0, and that's how you read this symbol, here. And you see
that -- you see that's the limit as delta x tends to 0. We're not saying it becomes
0, we're just saying it becomes as small as you like, as close as you like, to 0.
Then this ratio that we've written down here becomes comes the first derivative. So we're
saying that dy by dx at the point x1 is the limit as delta x tends to 0 of the change
in y over the change delta x in x.
Now, let's look at the sign that we get for first derivatives. On our curve here again
-- if y increases as we increase x -- so that's what happens here at our point x1 -- then
dy by dx is greater than 0. Because we've had a positive delta x in going from the left
to the right. And we've got a positive delta y in going upwards here, correspondingly in
y. So dy by dx is greater than 0 for this particular example. We're sloping up to the
right, and that means dy by dx is greater than 0.
If y decreases as we increase x, which is what we see over here at our point x3, then
dy by dx is less than 0, because y has decreased as x has increased. And here, we're sloping
down to the right. So when we're sloping down to the right, the derivative, dy by dx is
less than 0.
Now let's look at some standard derivatives. I'm not going to work these out for you; I'm
just going to state what the results are.
So the derivative of the power, that is, x to the power n, is n times x to the power
n minus 1. So let's just look at that. Here's our curve, y equals x squared -- a simple
parabola. And the derivative of that curve -- well, according to this formula here, it
should be 2x. x squared goes down to x to the power of 1. And we take this n, here,
to become a multiplier in front. So dy by dx is equal to 2x. And that is just straight
line that goes through the origin.
And what that is saying is that the slope starts negative here and gets progressively
smaller, actually exactly proportionately smaller, as we move down towards the origin.
And then it gets proportionately larger as we move into the positive x territory.
The derivative of a straight line -- here's a straight line, so that's x to the power
of 1 -- is just a constant. So we've taken x to the power of 1 and turned it into x to
the power of 0 by taking the derivative, and that, of course, is just a constant. And this
is true for any straight line that comes to a constant. What the constant is depends on
the slope of the straight line, of course. So the straight line, here, has a constant
slope, so it has a constant derivative.
The derivative of a function does not depend on the overall height of the function. So
all these lines, here, have the same slope. This one, this one, which we've moved up a
little bit, has exactly the same derivative, because the derivative of a constant is just
0. There's nothing changing. And again, as we go up to x plus 0.5, we've just moved the
line up. The derivative remains exactly the same.
The derivative of a constant -- here's a line that is just a constant, y equals 0.5, is,
of course, just 0. There's no rate of change of y with x. So the derivative is 0.
One very important function, of course, that we come across again and again is the exponential.
And the derivative of an exponential is just the same exponential. e to the x -- the derivative
of that is e to the x. So this is a remarkable property, and it's actually one of the reasons
why we like to work with logarithms and exponents of the number e or to the base e.
So here's the function y equals e to the x, on the left hand side. And here's its derivative.
It's exactly the same function. And this is the only non-zero function for which that
is true.
The derivative of the logarithm is also a very important derivative to know. The derivative
of the natural logarithm of x is 1 over x. Again, this is a reason why we like to work
with natural logarithms. Any other logarithm in here will have some constant on the right
involved with it.
So here is, again, plotted the function y equals log of x. And on the right hand side,
we see the derivative. And you note, of course, the derivative is also exploding at the origin.
It's also becoming infinite. It's this hyperbolic reciprocal function, here. It's the reciprocal,
or an example of a hyperbola. And that also corresponds with the fact the function itself
is becoming infinitely large and negative as we head down towards 0. The derivative
is also becoming infinitely large and, in this case, positive.
Derivatives of sine and cosine -- the derivative of the sine is the cosine, which is easy to
remember. And again, we can remember that by remembering the form of the sine curve,
here. It is going negative here, and it's got a negative slope. It turns around and
has a positive slope. And then, here, it has a positive slope and turns around and has
a negative slope, so that's what the cosine curve looks like.
Here, it's got a negative value, so that corresponds to this negative slope. Here, it has a positive
value, corresponding to this positive slope. Here, it has a positive value corresponding
to this positive slope, and here, it has a negative value corresponding to this negative
slope.
The derivative of the cosine is minus the sine. Here is our cosine function, again.
And we see that we have a positive slope, here, which is a positive value on this curve,
which is minus sine of x. Sine of x, itself, would be a curve that looks like this.
The slope is positive in here, and we see that we've still got a positive slope, here.
The slope is negative, here. We see we've got a negative value, here. It continues negative
here. We still get a negative value, there. So the derivative of cosine is minus sine.