Partial derivatives occur, of course, when we're working with functions of more than
one variable such as the height as a function of position in two directions. We talked about
north/south and east/west, so north/south perhaps like this and east/west like that.
However, we could just as well have chosen two other directions at right angles to one
another, maybe from the southwest to the northeast, and the southeast to the northwest. Those
can still be at right angles, but they're not the ones we had before.
So when working with such functions of more than one variable, we're going to have to
deal with the idea of changing from one coordinate system to another. If, for example, we know
the slope of some hill when we're going in the north/south direction and east/west directions,
can we therefore work out what it is in a new coordinate system when we're going southwest
to northeast, southeast to northwest?
We can do this. And manipulations like this are quite important, mostly because a new
coordinate system will often turn out to be much more convenient for the problem we would
like to solve. Now, a very good example of a different coordinate system is what we might
think of as spherical coordinates where we express the position of some point in terms
of a radius and two angles, so for example, a polar angle relative to a north pole, as
it were, sticking up here, and another angle in the plane.
Those three coordinates-- that angle, this angle, and the radius out along that-- would
be good coordinates. But they're not x, y, z-coordinates. Now, those spherical coordinates
themselves, we'll deal with the details of those later. But we should understand in general
the principles of how we can handle derivatives as we change from one way of expressing our
coordinates and our derivatives to another way.
To start this, we will need to look at the idea of differentials. That idea is also going
to help us with another idea along the way, which is what we call the total derivative.
So let's look at one patch of a function-- our same function, f of x and y, but we're
just looking at one small patch of it.
So this patch is delta x long in the x direction, delta y long in the y direction. Our question
is, how much does the height change, this height-- delta f is a change in the height--
as we move from one corner up to the other corner?
So as we move by delta x along the x direction, the height changes by the amount of this red
line here. And that length of that line is partial df by dx at constant y. That's the
gradient of this line here, the slope of that, times delta x. And so we've accumulated this
much change in height, delta f. And then, as we move by a distance delta y along the
y direction, the height changes by this additional amount, this red line here. And that amount
is the slope of this line times the amount delta y.
So this is the gradient partial df by dy at constant x. And so we take this bit of red
line and add it on over here. So now, we figured out the total change, delta f in the height
of this function, as we went from one corner up to the other.
So writing this out explicitly, this amount delta f is this piece of red line, which is
this much, plus this piece of red line, which is this much, to get the total here. So in
the limit, as we make the delta x and the delta y very small, that is, as we make them
what we say is infinitesimal, this entity here turns into this one. And this is called
a differential, or sometimes an exact differential.
Suppose now that we are out for a walk on a hill. It's a nice, sunny day and we're walking
along a path, and we know the direction that the path is going on the map. And perhaps
we know the slope of the hill in a couple of directions.
But the path might not be along those directions. It might be along another direction. Can we
find out how fast we are gaining height based on our understanding of the slopes of the
hill in a couple of directions, even though our path is going off in another direction?
To understand how fast we are gaining height, we need to look at something called the total
derivative. We suppose that we know the slopes of the hill in the two coordinate directions,
so df by dx at constant y and df by dy at constant x. We presume also that we know how
fast we're moving in the x direction and in the y direction. So that is, we know the two
components of our velocity.
So in the x direction, our component of velocity in the x direction is dx by dt. And note that
this is an ordinary derivative here. We're not holding anything constant. We're just
saying, how fast are we going in the x direction? What's our velocity in the x direction?
And similarly, what's our velocity in the y direction? What's our component of velocity
in the y direction? That also is just a conventional, simple, ordinary derivative. So in some small
amount of time delta t, we will have moved amounts delta x and delta y in the x and y
directions. So the amount we will have moved in the x direction, the delta x, will be our
velocity component in the x direction times this amount of time, delta t.
And similarly the amount that we will have moved in the y direction, delta y, will be
our velocity in the y direction, dy by dt times delta t. So using our differential idea,
we're going to substitute in for the delta x and the delta y what we know from our velocities
and the amount of time that has passed. So our delta x was our velocity in the x direction
times delta t. And our delta y was our velocity in the y direction times delta t.
Or equivalently, we could divide out by the delta t. So delta f over delta t is given
by partial df by dx at constant y times dx by dt plus partial df by dy at constant x
times dy by dt. Or in the limit of small delta t, we have this total derivative. df by dt
is the gradient in the x direction at constant y times the velocity in the x direction, plus
the gradient in the y direction at constant x times the velocity in the y direction.
And note that this is a conventional derivative here. It's not a partial derivative. We're
not holding anything constant. We're just saying, how fast are we gaining height? And
that gain in height is made up out of some amount from our movement along the x direction
plus some amount from our movement along the y direction.
So this could be called a total derivative in contrast to a partial derivative. And see
that it's made up of two parts using these two partial derivatives. Now we're going to
make another use of our differential, this time to understand how we change the coordinates
for partial derivatives. Suppose we want to know the slopes of a hill, hill f of x and
y, but not along the x and y directions, but along another couple of directions, so not
along the east and north directions here, the x and y directions, but along the southeast
direction and along the northeast direction.
But we only know the slopes along the east direction and the north direction-- that is
these two slopes, partial df by dx at constant y and partially df by dy at constant x. Well,
we do know that if we move southeast, that is, along the direction a here, by one unit--
so this fuzzy green line is one unit long-- then we move east by 1 over root 2 units.
Because 1 over root 2 is the cosine of 45 degrees.
So moving one unit along here in the southeast direction means we move 1 over root 2 units
along the east direction. Because 1 over root 2 is the cosine of 45 degrees. So in other
words, the rate of change of x with a at constant b is in this case 1 over root 2. That's how
much this changed as we moved along this line by a unit amount.
Similarly, the amount that y changed as we move along the green line here by one unit--
in this case, y actually decreases. And we really have minus 1 over root 2 here movement
along the y direction for one unit of movement along the positive a direction.
So partial dy by da at constant b, in this case, is minus 1 over root 2. Similarly, if
we were to move along the b direction by one unit, then we would move along the positive
x direction by 1 over root 2 units. And that 1 over root 2 is dx by db, partial derivative,
at constant a, because we're only moving along the b direction. And that also, in this case,
would be 1 over root 2. Similarly, if we ask how much y changes as we move along the b
direction here by one unit, the answer to that is 1 over root 2. dy by db at constant
a is 1 over root 2.
Suppose that we make a small movement delta a, then, along this southeast direction, and
no movement at all in the northeast direction. Then, we will move an amount delta x along
the x-axis, that is, dx by da at constant b times delta a. And in this case, that would
be 1 over root 2 times delta a.
Similarly, the amount that we have moved in the y direction by moving a small amount,
delta a, along the southeast direction here, the a direction, is partial dy by da at constant
b times delta a. And in this case, that's minus 1 over root 2 times delta a.
So with these results, that delta x can be written as partial dx by da at constant b
times delta a, and similarly, delta y can be written as partial dy by da at constant
b times delta a, the resulting change in delta f in the value of the function f from this
movement along the a, the southeast direction, is delta f is equal to partial df by dx at
constant y times our delta x here, which is partial dx by da at constant b, times delta
a.
And similarly, for our movement along the y direction here, that's our delta y as a
result of our delta a. So we multiply that by partial df by dy at constant x. So therefore,
starting from this expression we just figured out, dividing both sides by delta a, we obtain
this expression here. And taking the limit of small delta a, and noting that this time
this is all done at constant b, notice these partial derivatives are at constant b.
So this change, delta f with change delta a, is all done at constant b. Then, we have
the partial derivative. Partial df by da at constant b is given by all this expression
here. So given that we knew these gradients, partial df by dx at constant y and partial
df by dy at constant x, we can figure out the gradient along the a direction at constant
b, partial df by da at constant b.
What we have to know are these two partial derivatives-- partial dx by da at constant
b and partial dy by da at constant b. So now, we've achieved what we wanted to do. We knew
these gradients, and we wanted to figure out this one.
Now, since this is just a number-- partial dx by da at constant b for some specific value
b is just a number, and similarly, this is just a number-- we can move these around here.
And what we're going to do is we're going to swap the order of these two to get just
another way of writing the same thing as up here. But you'll see why we're doing that
in just a minute.
So I've just swapped the order of these, swapped the order of these. Since this expression
holds for some arbitrary function here, we didn't specify what it was other than that
it has appropriate derivatives. Since this is true for any function f, we can write more
generally partial d by da at constant b is equal to partial dx by da at constant b times
partial d by dx at constant y plus partial dy by da at constant b times partial d by
dy at constant x where we understand this is operating in any function.
And I understand that this notation gets very confusing. But you can see how we've built
it up here. And this is the general way of changing coordinates for a partial derivative.