Now we're going to introduce the important idea of functions and how we write them. We
will also remind ourselves of the basic trigonometric functions like the sine, the cosine, and the
tangent. And, of course, we will make a lot of use of these functions in our quantum mechanics.
Now we're going to introduce the idea of functions and the use, also, of parentheses with functions.
So, first of all, what is a function? A function is something that relates or maps one set
of values, such as an input, which could be, in our algebra, a variable or sometimes called
the argument of the function, to another set of values, which we can think of as the output.
So, for example, here's a very simple function. The function f of x equals x plus 1/4. So
that turns out to be a straight line. So on this graph here, on the vertical axis, we're
plotting f of x here as the value in the vertical axis against x on our horizontal axis. And
we see it's a nice straight line. When x is equal to 0, for example, we find that f of
x is a 1/4.
Now, as I just said, that conventionally when we say f of x, we are reading this object
here as being f of x. It's not f times x, and that's something we sort of have to deduce
from the context here. f of x is not f times x in this notation, though that might not
be obvious if you were merely thinking about what we said before about parentheses and
multiplications and so on.
And when we are writing functions like this, most commonly, we only use these parentheses
and not the other brackets. We might occasionally do that, but mostly, we don't use the other
ones. And hence, it might be rather obvious, from context, there would be no point in putting
these brackets or parentheses around this x if we were merely multiplying f times x.
But that's not a terribly reliable notation. But sometimes it makes it more obvious what
we're doing here, that we're talking about f of x and not f times x. Sometimes, we will
have more complicated expressions inside the parentheses.
Now that notation is used fairly rigorously, of putting parentheses around the argument,
but there are a few very commonly used functions such as the trigonometric functions -- which
I'll introduce for you -- in which we, for simplicity, just omit the parentheses when
the argument is simple.
So, for example, the trigonometric function sine -- instead of writing this out properly
with sine with parentheses, we might just omit the parentheses and write sine theta.
We should write it this way perhaps. It might be clearer, but commonly, we also write it
that way.
Now I've also plotted out for us here, the function sine theta. And that's a function
we're going to use a lot, and I've plotted it as a function of our angle along here.
Note, incidentally, that if we go to minus some argument here -- so here's sine of pi
by 2 is 1. Sine of minus pi by 2 is minus 1. And quite generally, sine of minus theta
is minus sine of theta.
Similarly for the cosine function, again, we might make this simplification of not bothering
to write the parentheses here when we're saying cos theta. And we also don't typically say
the of, cos of theta, but we might. Also, we will be using the cosine function a lot,
and note it's very like the sine function. But it's sort of shifted sideways so that
cos of 0 is 1. And note, also, that this cosine function is the same for positive angles as
it is for negative angles. So cos of minus theta is cos of theta. There's no minus sign
in here.
Now of course, we know these sines and cosines and also the other related trigonometric function,
the tangent, in terms of triangles. That's why they're called trigonometric functions.
And here's a classic right angle triangle. So this little symbol in here means, of course,
we're talking about a right angle.
And we imagine, in this triangle, we have a base, and we have a height. And there's
an angle in the middle. So this base is also in trigonometry sometimes called the adjacent
side because it's adjacent to the angle. That means beside the angle. And this side here
is sometimes called the opposite side because it's opposite to the angle. And the angle
here is theta. And then the line between these two is called the hypotenuse. And, often,
we will write these with x as being the length of the base, y as being the length of the
height or the magnitude of the height, and r as being the length of this third side of
the triangle.
So with those definitions, the sine of theta is y divided by r. Similarly, the cosine of
theta is x divided by r. And one other trigonometric function, of course, is the tangent. Tangent
of theta is y divided by x. Also, you can see that the tangent of theta is sine theta
divided by cos theta. That would be y over r divided by x over r. The r's cancel. And
therefore, tan theta is sine theta over cos theta.
And one thing you will have noticed here already is that I'm using the units of angles that
are radians. And the radian is a more convenient unit of angle to use for any fundamental mathematical
calculations. There are 2 pi radians in a circle, and 1 radian is 57.3 degrees. Remember
there are 360 degrees in a circle. So 2 pi radians in a circle. Then one radian is 57.3
degrees or approximately so.
Now there are another three versions of these trigonometric functions, and the notation
here can be a little confusing. The cosecant is 1 over sine theta. So it would be r over
y. It's sometimes written as cosec here. Alternatively, it may be written just as csc, short for cosec.
And the secant is 1 over the cosine of theta. So this is a confusing notation. The cosecant
is 1 over sine, but the secant is 1 over cosine. So the secant would be r over x.
And, also, the cotangent sometimes written cotan here or cot, C-O-T, is x over y, which
is 1 over tan theta, which is cos theta over sine theta.
Finally, another thing I should point out in this set of notation here is a somewhat
confusing choice of notations when we're superscripting sine and cosine functions. Now, this particular
function called sine to the minus 1 of some number here, sine to the minus 1 of a, is
also known as the arc-sine. As I said, that's pronounced arc-sine.
And it's the function that works backwards to give us the angle from the sine value.
So you'll notice it's really the sine function but laid on its side here. And as we go from
minus 1, that corresponds to an angle of minus pi by 2. So sine of minus pi by 2 would be
minus 1. And sine of pi by 2 would be 1. So it's really working backwards.
And this notation here is one that is used in talking about functions. If we have a function
f of x, then the function that maps this backwards from that value to the argument would be f
to the minus 1 of x. And that's the way that this minus 1 it's being used here. It's used
to indicate an inverse function.
So just to write that out properly, if we have a is equal to sine theta, the arc-sine,
or sometimes just written as asin, or sine to the minus 1 of a would be theta. But to
emphasize, again, sine to the minus 1 of a here does not mean 1 over sine a. The superscript
minus 1 here means the inverse function, not the reciprocal. This is the reciprocal. This
is the inverse function. It's not the same thing.
However, just to confuse the issue, when we want to write out the product sine theta times
sine theta, which we could always rigorously write as sine squared theta, sine theta all
squared here, we often use this notation. Where in this case, the square, the 2 here
does mean that we are squaring the function. So this is not the same kind of notation as
we had with the sine to the minus 1. So when we see sine squared theta, we understand that
it means sine theta times sine theta, not sine of sine theta, which would be corresponding
more to the notation we had for the sine to the minus 1.
Sine squared theta itself is a function that we will use quite a lot. And you'll notice
that it's a positive function all the time, which it has to be, of course, being a square.
And it's 0 at the origin and rises to 1 at minus pi by 2 and pi by 2.
Similarly, cos squared theta, the same kind of notation, cos squared theta means cos theta
all squared. And this kind of way of using these squares in here is a notation that is
almost exclusively only seen with these trigonometric functions and some other very close relatives.