Many equations in physics relate-- for example, how a system is going to change in time in
the future based on how it looks in space now. It's very common for the future evolution
in time to depend on the derivatives in space. For example, how a cloud of smoke disperses
over time depends how concentrated it is in space to start with. And such behavior, for
example, is often explained by something called the diffusion equation.
Another very common and important example and the one we're going to use here as an
illustration is the behavior of waves. Since these involve derivatives in space and time,
they're necessarily examples of what we call partial differential equations. Now, this
terminology with partial in it does not mean that they are incomplete in any way. It just
indicates that they contain partial derivatives.
Many waves in classical physics are described quite well using a particular differential
equation often just called the wave equation, and we will introduce this now. There are,
in fact, actually several quite different wave equations for different physical phenomena,
and an important point is that the main one we're going to use in quantum mechanics is
actually not of this form I'm about to give you. But this particular classical wave equation
is still a very useful example.
So let's look at a wave equation, then, as a good example of a differential equation.
And the one we're going to look at here is sometimes called a one dimensional scalar
wave equation, and it comes up a lot in classical physics.
So this is the equation we're going to look at. This equation has got second derivative
with respect to position here and the second derivative with respect to time here. And
this relates how strongly curved a function is in space, how strongly curved phi is here,
to the second derivative in time or the second temporal derivative.
We could write this more completely, specifying that this derivative here is taken with constant
time and this one here is taken with constant position. But again, usually, that's fairly
obvious so we will not bother to use that more complete notation.
Now, for this equation, we can easily check the following-- any function of the form f
of z minus ct, or indeed any function of the form g of z plus ct are solutions here. So
we can check this by the chain rule. At some time t naught we'll create an auxiliary variable
here we call s, and that will be z minus ct naught.
So differentiating f of z minus ct naught by z, we used the chain rule formerly, so
that's df by ds with constant s. And notice this one is just an ordinary derivative because
there's only one variable involved here in this expression of the function. And that's
evaluated at the point s equals to z minus ct naught because that's where we're doing
this differentiation. And then we're going to differentiate that variable s, this auxiliary
variable, with respect to z at time t equals t naught. So this is a chain rule used for
partial derivatives.
And in this case, ds by dz at time t naught is just 1-- in fact, it doesn't matter what
time is in this particular case. And so using the chain rule, partial df by dz minus ct
naught here by dz is actually the same as df of s by ds evaluated at this value of the
variable s.
We can go on to the second derivative. We're taking the derivative of df of s by ds, because
that's what we figured out the first derivative here turned into. And again, using the chain
rule that becomes the second derivative of f of s with respect to s-- again, evaluated
at this value s, again, times ds by dz, which of course is just 1 again. And so our second
spatial derivative, the partial derivative, turns into this total derivative here evaluated
at s equals z minus ct naught.
Similarly at some position z naught with rewriting our auxiliary variable now giving it another
form as z naught minus ct, we can do the same kind of operation on figuring out the time
derivative. And it follows the same procedure here, but note that ds by dt is minus c not
just 1 that we had before, but minus c because we've got minus c here. So ds by dt evaluated
at z equals z naught is minus c. And so we get a minus c in front of our first derivative
here.
And similarly for the second derivative, we proceed in a similar fashion but we get yet
another minus c coming in when we do this derivative here. So we've got c squared here
and we've lost our minus sign because we've got a second minus c that came in when we
did this derivative.
So putting this all together then, at some position z naught and at some time t naught,
our partial differential equation has been turned into an ordinary differential equation
here, and we can see that this will equal 0. In other words, we have proved that the
function of this form, f of z minus ct naught, does indeed satisfy the wave equation because
this was the wave equation and that has to equal 0, and indeed it does for this function
f of z minus ct naught. So we did not have to say anything about this function other
than that it has particular derivatives that are well defined. And we can do the same thing
for g of z plus ct.
So let's look at what these solutions mean and one of these turns out to be what we call
a forward wave. The difference between this function at time t 1 and the same function
at time t 2 is simply that we have shifted the function over. So if f of z minus ct 1
looked like this, then f of z minus ct 2 is just the same thing shifted over, here presuming
that t 2 is greater than t 1. So, moved over by an amount c t 2 minus t 1.
So this is a function that in time, as time goes forward, this function is moving to the
right. It's moving to positive values of z. So let's just look at that. The wave is moving
to the right with velocity c.
Similarly, if we look at the other possibility, the g of z plus ct 1, then the difference
between this function at t 1 and this function at t 2 is that this function is shifted to
the left by an amount ct 2 minus t 1. So if this was g of z plus ct 1, then at some later
time g of z plus ct 2 would have moved to the left. And again, it moves at velocity
c.
We just need to clarify one thing about signs and propagation directions. It's not the absolute
sign of z or ct in these expressions that matters. It's only the relative sign of z
and ct. For example, f of ct minus z is still a wave going to the right though its shape
will be the opposite of the function f of z minus ct. So if this was f of z minus ct,
then this would be f of ct minus z.
Now, very often we're interested in what we call monochromatic waves-- that is, the situation
where the waves are oscillating at one specific angular frequency omega. So we're saying the
temporal behavior of the wave is of the form some function capital T of small t, which
could be e to the i omega t, it could be e to the minus i omega t, it could be cos omega
t, it could be sine omega t, or indeed any combination of these.
Now, as a result of saying while the time behavior is always the same-- it's the same
at every point on the function in space-- so therefore we can split this overall wave
function, phi of z and t, into a product of some function of space, which we'll call capital
Z of z, little z, and some function of time capital T of little t.
As a result of that, when we take the second time derivative of phi, we always get minus
omega squared times phi. That works taking the time derivative of any of these functions,
or indeed any combination of them. So when we look at the wave equation, because we can
substitute for d 2 phi by dt squared, being minus omega squared phi, our wave equation
for the spatial part that is left turns into this form, where k squared is omega squared
over c squared. So we just simply substitute this expression for the time derivative into
our wave equation, and we're left with this part here for what's going on with the spatial
part, and this is called Helmholtz's equation, which we encountered before.
Now, a very important point about wave equations is that the ones that we're interested in,
at least, are linear-- that is, for this wave equation here and therefore also the Helmholtz
equation because it's just a special case of this one, they are both linear equations.
That is, if phi 1 of z and t is a solution of the equation and phi 2 of z and t is a
solution, then so also is any combination of them where these are arbitrary constants
a and b here. And that is what we call linear superposition, and many of the waves that
we want to work with show linear superposition.
A particular example of linear superposition is what we can call standing waves. So if
we take an equal combination of forward and backward waves-- so here's a forward wave
here and here's a backward wave, I've just taken an equal linear combination of these
two sine forms. We can also by the rules of trigonometry rewrite that in this form-- these
two are exactly equivalent to one another. And here, again, k is omega divided by c,
the wave velocity.
This gives us what we call standing waves. So we're going to look at our rope tied to
two walls at either end, and we're going to choose a specific value of k equal to 2 pi
over L and omega, therefore, equal to 2 pi c over L. And these choices satisfy the boundary
conditions that the wave has to be 0 on these two walls.
There are many other choices we can make here that also satisfy these boundary conditions,
and you can guess what they are. I've chosen a specific example here where our rope goes
both up and down. We could have had one where it just went like this or one where it was
up and down and up and again, this one. We'll just look at this one here.
So with these specific choices of k and omega, we get a wave that satisfies the wave equation
and satisfies these boundary conditions, and incidentally is a summation of an equal amount
of a forward wave and a backward wave. It's really the sum of a wave going like this and
a wave going like that at the same time.
So let's look at what happens to this wave here. That's the classic behavior we see for
standing waves on a rope and that's an excellent example of both linear superposition and the
overall behavior of wave equations.