We're now going to start on a very important piece of algebra that we use extensively in
mathematics and physics, which is the use of imaginary and complex numbers. And we start
this by talking about the square root of minus 1. So, in ordinary real numbers, no number
multiplied by itself gives a negative result. So, 2 times 2 equals 4, but also minus 2 times
minus 2 equals 4.
Equivalently, there is no real square root of a negative number. There's no number that
we know of as a real number that when multiplied by itself will give us a negative number.
However, we can choose to define an entity that we call the square root of minus 1. And
if we define that entity, we can write square roots of negative numbers.
And the reason for doing this is really a purely practical one. The result of doing
this is we obtain a very useful algebra, an algebra that saves us a lot of time and effort.
So, let's just choose to define this entity, i, as the square root of minus 1. So, that
means that i squared is minus 1. And also, minus i squared is minus 1, because the minus
times a minus just gives us a plus.
So again, we end up with i squared, which is minus 1 by definition. Incidentally, it's
very common in engineering to use the notation j equals the square root of minus 1, and there's
nothing wrong with that notation. In what I do, I will use i, because I'll be following
mostly the physics conventions, but j is another way of writing square root of minus 1. And
I think in electrical engineering, it avoids the problem of confusing the i with an i that
might represent current, for example.
Any number that is proportional to i with some real factor multiplying it is called
an imaginary number. So 4 times i, which I've just written here as 4i, or some other number,
3.74 times i, or i times pi here, these are all imaginary numbers. It's common to put
the i after numbers written out, like 4 or 3.74, but to put it before variables or other
algebraic constants. But it doesn't matter which way you do this. This is just a convention.
And we know that we can write the square root of any negative number using i, so the square
root of minus 4 we could write as the square root of minus 1 times 4, which would be the
square root of minus 1 on its own, multiplied by the square root of 4 on its own. So that
would be i times 2, and you might conventionally write that as 2i.
When we put together real numbers and imaginary numbers, we get complex numbers. So if we
consider some now complex number, g here that is made up out of a real number, a, plus i
times another real number, i times this other real number is now an imaginary number, so
the total number, g, is called a complex number. It's got a real part, which is a, and we write
that as re of g here.
And it has an imaginary part, which is b, the part that is proportional to the square
root of minus 1. So, a is called the real part of g, b is called the imaginary part
of g. And we use this notation, the re and the im. The  complex conjugate of a complex number is the
number with the sign of the imaginary part reversed. And we indicate this complex conjugate
usually with a superscript asterisk here.
So if g was a plus ib, then g star, or the complex conjugate of g is a minus ib. So we
often call this asterisk a star. Now, multiplying g by its complex conjugate gives us a positive
number, which is called the modulus squared of g. And the positive square root of this
modulus squared is called the modulus of g. So, this is the modulus squared. It's g times
its complex conjugate. Either way around, it doesn't matter.
We use these two lines here, which are often used to represent a modulus, and the square,
of course. And as I said, the positive square root of this product, we would call just the
modulus of g. That's the positive square root of this modulus squared of g. Let's look at
some important complex number identities.
We note that for the modulus squared, which of course we can write as g, g star, we can
also write that out as a plus ib times a minus ib. And of course, we can multiply that out.
So a times a gives us the a squared here. The ib times the a gives us our ib times a
here. The a times minus ib gives us minus iab here, and the ib times the minus ib gives
us the minus i squared, b squared.
And of course, since these two terms in the middle cancel, we have a squared plus b squared.
In other words, we have this important identity that the modulus squared of a complex number,
a plus ib equal to g is a squared plus b squared. For the reciprocal of a complex number, it's
not immediately obvious that this can also be written in a form like a plus ib, but it
can be.
So if we have a number that's 1 over c plus id here, we can multiply by c minus id on
the top and bottom lines. We can multiply out this bottom line. That just comes to c
squared plus d squared. And so we've managed to turn this number here, which was 1 over
a c plus id into some number that is an a plus an i times a b. So the reciprocal of
a complex number can also always be written in the form a plus ib.
In this case, it's a minus associated with this term. But it's still the same form, an
a and a b here. So just writing that out, the reciprocal of a complex number can also
be written in this same form, with a real part and an imaginary part. And the imaginary
part here is minus this stuff here. Still a sum of real and imaginary parts.