Now, we remember from elementary algebra that if we take the number, say, 2 and multiply
it by itself, and then by itself again, of course, that is 2 to the power 3. And the
3 here is called the exponent. And that's the power to which the number 2 is raised.
So multiplying again by the same number raises the power, 2 to the power of 3 becomes 2 to
the power of 4 by multiplying again by 2. And conversely, if we divide by 2, we get
from 2 to the power of 3 down to 2 to the power of 2. And if we keep on with this following
this logic here, if we divide again by 2, of course, we get 2, but we can also call
that 2 to the power of 1.
And if we keep going, dividing by 2 again, we get 2 to the power of zero. And 2 to the
power of zero by this logic here is 1. And of course, we take that as a general result
that any number to the power of zero is 1. So x to the power of zero is equal to 1.
And so we can keep going. 1/2 which is 2 to the power of zero divided by 2, we can write
as 2 to the power minus 1. Just taking another 1 off the power as we divide by 2 again.
And we can keep going for further negative powers. 1/2 times 1/2, which we can think
of as a 1/2 squared is just 1 over 2 squared, of course, and it's also 2 to the power of
minus 1 divided by 2, so it's 2 to the power of minus 2. So 1/2 squared, which is obviously
equal to a 1/4, we can also write as 2 to the power of minus 2. Generalizing, for any
number x and any power a, we can write that 1 over x to the power of a is also x to the
power minus a.
We can also call 1/x or x to the power minus 1 the reciprocal of x. Here is the function
of 1/x shown over on the right. You can see that it gets very large as we reduce x in
the positive direction down towards zero. In the negative direction here it's a negative
number, and it becomes arbitrarily large in negative as it approaches the origin, or zero,
x equals zero.
And loosely, we might say this "explodes at the origin." More precisely, we should use
the notation that it is "singular" at the origin. And this is an example of something
we could call a singularity, which usually involves a function heading off towards infinity.
In this case, it heads off to plus infinity on one side and negative infinity on the other.
And incidentally, negative powers generally have this property of exploding, as we get
towards the origin.
Multiplying a number by itself, of course, we also know is called taking the square.
So here is x squared-- that's x times x-- and it's called taking the square, because
it gives the area here of a square with side x here. Now, we can also look at the square
root-- that's the opposite of taking a square. And for some number x, the number the square
root of x here-- that when multiplied by itself gives us x-- is called the square root of
x.
So the square root of x times the square root of x equals x, of course, that's our definition
of what we mean by a square root. For example, the square root of 4 is 2. This sign here
is sometimes called the radical sign. And also we can write the square root with the
radical sign or we can also write it as x to the power 1/2.
Squaring that gives us x to the power of 1, which, of course, is x. And here's just a
graph of the square root of x as a function here, as a function of x. You'll see it, does
not explode anywhere and it starts here at zero, and rises fairly smoothly with increasing
x.
Now, note that if the square root of x times the square root of x equals x, so also minus
the square root of x times minus the square root of x equals x, because minus 1 times
minus 1 is equal to 1. So although 2 is the square root of 4, also minus 2 is the square
root of 4. And conventionally, we will typically presume that we mean the positive square root.
So when we see the square root of 4, we probably mean 2, rather than minus 2. Unless we state
otherwise, we mean the positive square root. But we should always remember that both the
positive and negative versions of the square root are quite legitimate versions of the
square root of a number.
Now, Pythagoras's theorem tells us that the square of this distance here, the hypotenuse,
is equal to the sum of the squares of this side and of this opposing side of this right
angle triangle. And so equivalently we could say that the length of this side of the triangle
is the square root of x squared, the square of this side, plus y squared, the square of
that side. And by convention here, we always take the positive square root.
So r is a distance and it is always positive. And in general, this process of summing up
the squares and taking the square root, where we have distances that are right angles to
one another is a general way of understanding the distance between two points.
A very useful piece of algebra that we all know very well is how to deal with an equation
like this. This is a quadratic equation, so ax squared plus bx plus c equal to zero. And
the solutions, or the roots, of this particular equation are given by a very standard formula
x is equal to minus b plus or minus the square root of b squared minus 4ac all over 2a. So
there are two roots, one corresponding to the plus, and the other corresponding to the
minus.
This has a very simple graphical meaning. If I plot out the function x squared minus
x minus 2 here-- that's a function that corresponds to the quadratic, if we set a equals 1, b
equals minus 1, and c equals minus 2 in this formula up here. And then the idea of the
roots is that these are the points at which this particular graph crosses through the
origin.
And of course, we have our formula here for figuring out the answers. And if we use that
formula, we get two answers to the formula 2 or minus 1, and, indeed, we find this red
curve here crosses through the horizontal axis at 2 or minus 1, that's when this function
is equal to zero. And this here is an example of a quadratic curve, also known as a parabola.
Incidentally, we note that it's possible to factor this quadratic equation here into the
product of these two terms. This one corresponds to the root, where x is equal to 2, because
if x is equal to 2, this term is zero, and so the expression on the right is zero. And
similarly, this term corresponds to the point where x is equal to minus 1, because if x
is equal to minus 1, this term equals zero, and so the equation equals zero. And as I
said, this is an example, this curve here, is an example of a parabola.
Now, we can go on with powers. To raise a power, such as 2 to the power 3, for example,
to the power of 2, that is to square 2 to the power 3. Now, we can write that out, it's
2 times 2 times 2-- that is 2 to the power of 3-- times 2 times 2 times 2, again, which
gives us 2 to the power of 6. Generalizing, we can say that if we have a to the power
of b, and we raise it to the power of c, we simply have to multiply the b and the c together.