So suppose we have a function f of two variables x and y. Then we can have the gradient of
f as a function of x with y held constant. For example, suppose that x is along the east-west
direction pointing east, and y is along the north-south direction, pointing north. Then,
if we were to walk along the easterly direction, walk towards the east, then we would see the
gradient of our hill. Perhaps it slopes upwards in the easterly direction, and we would be
walking up the hill. So that would be the gradient of the hill as a function of where
we are along the east-west axis towards the east without changing our position on the
north-south axis.
And we can write this gradient using the following notations here. This is the most complete
notation. And we would say, for this notation, the partial derivative of f with respect to
x with y held constant. Now, because this function is only a function of two variables,
x and y, If we're taking the derivative with respect to x, the partial derivative, then
rather obviously, y is what is being held constant. And so we can drop this additional
notation here, perhaps, and just write the simpler form here.
So we pronounce this kind of notation partial df by dx. And to be explicit, we might add,
with y held constant. And this funny little symbol here is a kind of a d. And we might
call that partial d. Similarly, if we were walking in the north-south direction towards
the north, perhaps, along the positive y direction, without changing our position along the east-west
direction, so with a constant x, we would experience the gradient of the hill in the
north-south direction when walking north. And we could write that as partial df by dy
at constant x. Or again, if it's obvious that x is being held constant, we might just write
this simpler notation. And now we have partial df by dy.
So let's look at some partial derivatives by looking at slopes on this function that
we've got over here. So this is our function f of x and y. So here's the x-axis. And along
there is the y-axis. And we're seeing, therefore, we've got some surface. This is our hill,
perhaps, with a height f of x and y. It varies, obviously, with the coordinates x and y.
So at some specific position here, the value of the function, the height here, is f of
x-naught and y-naught at the position x-naught, y-naught.
So let's rotate round and look at the slopes along specific directions. And now we're going
to be looking at the slope along the y direction with x held constant. So everywhere along
this black line here is a specific constant value of x. And what we're going to be looking
at as we change y along here, we're going to be looking at the slope here.
So along the y direction at this point, x-naught, y-naught, the rate of change of height with
y at constant x is given by the slope of this line here, this orange line. Rotating round
to look at the other side now, we're going to be looking at a point x-naught and the
gradient round about there as we change x along a line of constant y. So this black
line here is a line of constant y, so y equals y-naught. So again, along the x direction,
at some point, x-naught, y-naught, this point here, the rate of change of the height with
x at constant y-- so that's along this line here of constant y-- is the slope of this
orange line now.
So we can also form second and higher-order partial derivatives. For example, here, partial
d2 f by dx squared, or in this more complete notation here, explicitly saying we're holding
y constant, is a second derivative, a second partial derivative. And just as for the ordinary
second derivative, it's a measure of the curvature of a function, in this case explicitly the
curvature of the function f in the x direction.
So let's look at a specific function here now that we see in both the x and y directions.
And this particular one is a function that is kind of a dome here, so high in this point
in the middle and smaller at parts around the outside. And also, we could be talking
about the second partial derivative, d2 f by dy squared. Again, we could write that
more explicitly with the x held constant here. And this is a measure of the curvature of
the function in the y direction.
So for this particular function, for example, if we move along this line here, we see that
as we increase x up in this region, the gradient is going from positive over towards negative
in this part of the function. Therefore d2 f by dx squared in this region here is negative.
And similarly, if we're looking at d2 f by dy squared, anywhere at the top of this dome,
d2 f by dy squared is similarly negative, because we're changing from a positive gradient
towards a negative gradient.
We could also look at our function that was the other way up, that was a minimum down
in here. And similarly, as we move down into that minimum, now we're seeing that as we
go, say, along the x direction, a negative gradient heading down into the minimum is
turning into a positive one as we come back out the other side.
So d2 f by dx squared here, the partial derivative, is positive. And similarly, in the y direction,
as we move along y, we're going from a negative gradient in y to a positive gradient in y.
So again, partial d2 f by dy squared is greater than 0.
And it's also possible to have functions where one of the second partial derivatives is positive,
and the other one is negative. So here, as we are going along the x direction-- for example,
suppose we're in this region here-- we're going from a negative gradient along x, we're
going downhill for positive x to going uphill for positive x. So that's a positive second
partial derivative, d2 f by dx squared. But in the y direction, as we go along one of
these lines in this middle region here, we have a negative second partial derivative,
d2f by dy squared, because we're going from a positive gradient in y towards a negative
gradient in y. And this particular kind of curve is sometimes called a saddle point for
rather obvious reasons, because it looks a bit like the saddle that you put on a horse.
Now, with partial derivatives, we can get something that we don't see with ordinary
derivatives, which is the cross derivative. This cross derivative here you see has got
second-order, d2, on the top line, but it's got dx and dy on the bottom. So this is partial
d2 f by dx dy.
And what does that mean? Well, we can have a gradient df by dy at constant x. And what
we're asking is, how fast does that gradient change as we move along x? And this particular
kind of entity here is a measure of how warped a surface is.
So here's a somewhat warped surface. And what we can see here is that if we look at df by
dy, it is negative here. So we get a negative gradient. And as we move along x, that turns
into a positive gradient. So the gradient df by dy is changing from being negative to
being positive as we move along x. That means d2 f by dx dy, the partial cross derivative,
is greater than 0, because we changed from a negative df by dy to a positive df by dy.
Note, incidentally, that for ordinary smooth functions it doesn't matter which order you
do this in. And I'm not going to prove that to you, but if you think about what's going
on with calculating these radius cross derivatives based on the values of the functions at points,
you can actually prove that these are the same thing.
We can also look at a function that's warped the other way around. And in this case, partial
d2 f by dx dy is less than 0. So we had a gradient here in the y direction that was
positive, and as we moved out to larger x, it became negative. And that would give us
a negative cross derivative.