Elementary classical mechanics is, as I said, sometimes called Newtonian classical mechanics.
This name distinguishes it from what are called Hamiltonian versions of classical mechanics
or Lagrangian version of classical mechanics. These are actually the same thing as Newtonian
classical mechanics underneath. But they are somewhat more mathematically more sophisticated
in the way they set out the same concepts.
This Newtonian name also distinguishes the mechanics from relativistic classical mechanics.
And of course, again, the Newtonian name distinguishes us from quantum mechanics. Throughout this
course, as I mentioned, we are only going to deal with the non-relativistic quantum
mechanics. And to be clear, by non-relativistic, we mean here that any particles with mass
must effectively be moving much slower than the velocity of light.
Incidentally, photons, the particles that make up light, they do have to travel at the
velocity of light. But they have no mass, and it turns out we can still handle most
of the physics of photons in quantum mechanics without having to deal with that explicit
relativistic physics. Unfortunately, we are going to have to postpone most of the discussion
of the quantum mechanics of light for some later time.
Here then, we're going to start by reminding ourselves of some of the basic ideas from
classical mechanics, including the ideas, as I said, of momentum, of kinetic energy,
of potential energy, and of force, and the various relations between them. For a particle
of mass m, a classical momentum, which is a vector because it has direction, is p equals
2m times v, where v is the vector velocity.
So velocity has a magnitude, a speed, as it were, and the direction. So it's a vector.
And momentum is also a vector. The kinetic energy, which is the energy associated with
motion, we can write as p squared over 2m. You may be more used to the version that the
kinetic energy is 1/2mv squared. That's mass times velocity squared divided by 2.
These are the same thing in ordinary classical mechanics. In quantum mechanics, we generally
prefer to think about momentum rather than velocity. And so we're more likely to write
kinetic energy as p squared over 2m when we're thinking about the classical version. In this
kinetic energy expression here, p squared over 2m, by p squared, we mean the vector
dot product of the momentum with itself.
Potential energy is defined as energy due to position, as opposed to the kinetic energy,
which was energy due to motion. And in quantum mechanics, we usually denote it by the letter
capital V, even though this potential energy, which is in units of joules-- joules being
the unit of energy-- might be confused with the idea of a voltage in units of joules per
Coulomb, because V is very often used as the letter to represent voltage.
But here, in quantum mechanics, V is just going to be potential energy, usually. But
we will often use the idea of voltage in quantum mechanics, so we just need to remember not
to be confused by this. Now, since potential energy is energy due to position, it can be
written as a function of the vector position, r. So we'll often seen this, V of r.
And we can talk about potential energy only if that energy depends only on where we are
and not on how we got there. So if we look at this hill here and we put ourselves at
some point on the hill, it shouldn't matter if we go up the hill and then back down again.
The energy that we got on the way up that we put into ourselves or the system on the
way up, we got it back on the way back down. So we got back to exactly the same potential
energy.
The potential energy is only due to the position. Now, classical fields with this property are
called conservative or irrotational fields. That means without a rotational aspect to
them. And in that case, the change in potential energy going around any closed path, as we
just did, when we went up the hill and back down again, is zero. Not all fields are like
this.
For example, if we had a vortex-like field, then that would not be true. In a vortex field,
such as the bathtub vortex you get when you drain water down the bathtub drain, has rotational
sense to it. So if we had some vortex-like or rotational field, if you went around in
one direction, it might take you a lot of work to go around that path. But perhaps in
the other direction, the field would do work on you.
This is often encountered with various effects associated with magnetic fields, for example.
We can get rotational effects. This obviously would not be conservative, because the energy
you have at this point here doesn't depend only on where you are. It depends on your
past history, and in this case, whether you went around a circle this way or around a
circle that way .
But there are many conservative fields. Good examples are gravitational fields and in particular,
electrostatic fields. And we'll often use those, as we discussed, in quantum mechanics.
But as I said, various fields are not, and some of the effects associated with magnetic
fields are not conservative. The total energy can be written as the sum of the potential
and kinetic energies, at least if we're working in an irrotational field, like gravitational
or electrostatic one.
And when we write this total energy out as a function of position and momentum, it can
be called the classical, in this case, Hamiltonian. That's a historical reason why it's called
this, after a gentleman by the name of Hamilton. And for a classical particle of mass m in
a conservative potential, V of r, then the total energy, of course, is just the sum of
the momentum squared over 2m plus the potential energy, V of r. That is kinetic plus potential.
And as I said, when we write this energy in terms of momentum and position, we can also
call this the Hamiltonian. We'll come back to this later on. For the moment, we just
need to know that it's something that represents the total energy of the particle when we express
it in terms of momentum and position. Note incidentally that the zero or the origin we
use for potential energy is always arbitrary.
We can choose it to be what we want, as long as we're consistent about it. In both classical
mechanics and quantum mechanics, there is no absolute origin for potential energy. And
in fact, we only really work with differences in potential energy between one position and
another. It makes no difference to any problem either in classical mechanics or quantum mechanics
at what position we say that potential energy is equal to zero,
again, as long as we are consistent all the way through a problem; we have to use the
same zero. We do typically make some specific choice in practice. And we do that often just
to make it easy to do the algebra in the problem of interest. In classical mechanics, the idea
of force is a very important one. We often use this concept of force, and Newton's second
law of relates force and acceleration.
So you may remember the force is a vector equals the mass times the acceleration. So
if you push on a mass, it will start to accelerate. And how fast it accelerates is dependent on
how much force you put on and how massive it is, of course. So m is the mass, and a
is the acceleration, and it's a vector.
Equivalently, we could say that the force is equal to the rate of change of momentum.
We do find behavior that corresponds to Newton's second law in quantum mechanics. But we don't
use Newton's second law as the way to start quantum mechanics. And in fact, in quantum
mechanics, we seldom use the idea of a force directly.
We can express the same idea by thinking of a force as the gradient, the slope as it were
of a potential. And we'll set up our quantum mechanics more using these potentials, instead
of the forces directly. To understand the relation between force and potential energy,
suppose that we're trying to change the potential energy of a ball by pushing it slowly and
frictionlessly in our idealized view up a hill or a slope.
So let's look at a situation where we have a slope here, sometimes called an inclined
plane in classical mechanics. And we imagine we have some ball that we're going to push
up the hill. So we're going to push it through a distance, delta x. And we're going to be
pushing with a particular magnitude of force here, f push x.
So to push this ball up the hill here, we're going to exert this force. And as we do this,
we're going to get a change, delta V, in the potential energy, V. And that is going to
be the product of the amount of force that we are pushing with times the delta x, the
amount we change the position in the x direction as we move up the slope.
So the change in potential energy is the force times the distance, all in the same direction.
Equivalently, we could flip that formula around and say that the force is the same thing as
the rate of change of potential energy with position. And here, we're imagining we're
doing this very slowly. So there's no kinetic energy involved with this.
So the force is the rate of change of potential energy with position here, the delta V over
delta x. Or in the limit, we could write that as dV by dx in the limit of very small delta
x. Now, the force exerted by the potential gradient on the ball is downhill. In other
words, we think here that gravity is trying to push the ball down the hill.
So the relation between the force from the potential energy is minus dV by dx. We were
pushing uphill to counteract the force that comes from the potential energy which was
trying to push the ball down the hill. So the force associated with the potential energy
itself is minus dV by dx. We had to push uphill to do some work to change the potential energy.
We were pushing against the force that comes from the rate of change of potential energy.
So that force from the rate of change of potential energy is minus dV by dx.
So far, we've only been thinking about force in one very specific direction. Of course,
force is a vector, so we have to think explicitly about directions. And we can generalize our
idea of the relation between potential and force to three dimensions, with force as a
vector, by using the gradient operator. So the gradient operator, you remember, is gradient
of V or grad V.
The gradient is constructing the three components of the force, one in the x direction, one
in the y direction, and one in the z direction, using the partial , derivatives. Partial dV
by dx is the component of the force in the x direction. Partial dV by dy is the component
of the force in the y direction.
And partial dV by dz is the component of the force in the z direction. And these all add
up to give us our more general three dimensional relation between potential and the force associated
with it as minus the gradient of the potential. So this completes our basic revision of elementary
classical mechanics. As I said, we will be using many of these concepts, especially the
kinetic and the potential energies and the momentum as we start to set up quantum mechanics.