Unlike light, which had seemed to have a good theory from classical electromagnetism, our
understanding of matter itself was arguably much less advanced in the classical physics
world of the 19th century. We certainly had a strong empirical understanding of many aspects
of chemistry and the ideas of atoms and elements. But we really had no good idea of what atoms
really were and where something like the periodic table of the elements, for example, actually
comes from.
Now, quantum mechanics solves these problems of understanding what matter is. Indeed, there
is essentially nothing about the properties of materials that we can adequately explain
from a basic point of view if we don't go back to quantum mechanics. We simply have
to use quantum mechanics to explain most properties of materials. Why are some materials hard
and others soft?
For example, why can a diamond scratch almost anything, but a pencil lead will slide smoothly,
leaving a black line behind it? And as you probably know, even more surprisingly, both
the diamonds and the pencil lead are actually made from exactly the same element-- carbon.
The pencil lead is essentially graphite, that version of carbon.
Why do metals conduct electricity and heat easily, but glass does not? Why is glass transparent?
Why do metals reflect light? Why is one substance heavy, and another substance is light? Why
are some metals magnetic, and others are not? And as I said, where does the periodic table
of the elements come from?
Now, to answer those questions, we need a good deal of science, and other science, such
as chemistry, and material science, and many other branches of physics. Those questions
are not easy to answer in any detail without going to those other sciences and that other
body of knowledge. But in doing so, all of these sciences will rely on our basic quantum
mechanical view of how materials are put together.
The next step in this introductory history of quantum mechanics is the attempt to explain
the behavior of the simplest of all elements. That's the hydrogen atom. Quantum mechanics
solves this problem and, in doing so, sets up our entire understanding of what the ordinary
matter round about us actually is.
When we heat up hydrogen, which is a gas under normal conditions, it emits light. But it
does so only at a very specific set of wavelengths. These wavelengths extend from x-rays to the
infrared. And we're showing in this picture here the lines that we can see in the visible
part of the spectrum. And these form part of what is called the Balmer series.
So for example, we see a red line-- the hydrogen alpha line-- at 656.3 nanometers for its wavelength.
We see the hydrogen beta line as some sort of light blue-green color, the blue hydrogen
gamma line, and the violet hydrogen delta line. Now, why does hydrogen emit only at
these specific wavelengths?
This was well known at that time in the early 1900s. Many models were being discussed at
the time for what hydrogen was really like. A very important intermediate model of the
hydrogen atom is the so-called Bohr model. This model starts out by assuming that the
electron is a particle that orbits around another particle, the proton, in much the
same way that a planet orbits around the sun. But here, we're relying on electrostatic attraction
between the negatively charged electron and the positively charged proton, instead of
the gravitational attraction we would see for an actual planet and an actual sun.
Then comes Bohr's key assumption, which he published in 1913. Presume for some reason
not known that the angular momentum of this electron can only take specific values. Angular
momentum is that property that something has when it's spinning. It's like momentum. You
retain it as you go forward. Unless there's some friction or something, things keep on
spinning.
But what he was proposing here was that this angular momentum, which something like an
orbiting electron would certainly have, can only exist in units of Planck's constant divided
by 2 pi. Incidentally, this quantity, Planck's constant, h, divided by 2 pi occur so often
in physics that we give it its own name and symbol. We call it h-bar. And we write it
as h with a line through the stem.
In the Bohr model, we give each orbit a number, n, that we say also corresponds to the number
of units of h-bar of angular momentum in that orbit. This is a remarkable leap. Planck's
constant was originally developed to understand something about light emission. Now, we're
applying it to the structure of matter.
This model quite remarkably does give the energies of the spectral lines of hydrogen.
They are the energies of the separations of these different orbits in energy. So if we
go back to our set of lines, we can see this result explicitly.
Now, we find that the photon energies corresponding to these lines are these very specific ones
that we've written on the view graph here, showing, for example, the transition from
n equals 3 to n equals 2 being that red line in our Balmer series. And for the other lines
here, they are, for example, the light blue line is from n equals 4 to n equals 2. And
the darker blue line is from n equals 5 to n equals 2. And the violet line is from n
equals 6 to n equals 2.
So this understanding that we get from quantum mechanics, namely that the color here of the
emission of light is associated with the energy separation of energy levels of the materials,
is the basic theory of why materials have the colors that they have. Once we understand
the detail of quantum mechanics better, we can actually calculate these energy levels
and how they interact with light. And as a result, we could figure out the color of some
material.
As we said, then, this model successfully incorporates Planck's constant into the theory
of matter. It also gets the approximate size of the hydrogen atom correct. That size is
roughly 1/10 of a nanometer in diameter. Or half that is the radius.
Often for atoms, we will use units that English speakers typically mispronounce as Angstroms
and which correspond exactly to 1/10 of a nanometer. These units take the name of a
Swedish scientist and should be pronounced "ongstroem" or something like that -. again,
I apologize for my pronunciation - which is, of course, his name.
However, despite its remarkable success and it's very substantial importance in the development
of quantum theory, the Bohr model is not actually right in several ways. It does not quite get
this angular momentum right, although the quantization in units of h-bar remains very
important.
It also appears to predict that the atom would be radiating electromagnetic radiation all
the time, because it's a spinning electron that we're whizzing around the nucleus here,
the proton. And a spinning electron like that whizzing around in an orbit would be continually
radiating electromagnetic energy and, thus, losing energy. And that just does not make
sense here.
And it gives an entirely incorrect picture of what the hydrogen atom actually looks like.
A very important point is that the electron is not some small point in a classical orbit.
It is, however, very, very difficult to get this picture out of people's minds.
And to help counter that problem, here is what the hydrogen atom actually looks like.
So these are calculations from the deeper quantum theory that we will get to of the
hydrogen atom. And on the left, we see the n equals 1 state. It's actually a kind of
a fuzzy ball. And one thing that's a surprise to many people, it actually has its highest
density at the center of the ball.
One of the next levels of the hydrogen atom is shown on the right. Again, this looks nothing
like a point electron in some classical orbit. And for those of you who are used to seeing
these things, perhaps, in some chemistry class, the one on the right is what's called a p
orbital of the hydrogen atom. And there are three of those. That's one in one direction
- perhaps, we'll call it the horizontal x direction, there's one in the y direction
and one in the z direction.
Anyway, we will come back to that later on. In his 1924 Ph.D. thesis, Louis de Broglie
(and that's a strange pronunciation for an English speaker - it's a French pronunciation
of that spelling, but that's the guy's name) made a deceptively simple proposal. Just as
it seemed that what we previously thought of as waves, namely light and electromagnetism,
might also have particle properties, also, specifically in that case, the photon, he
proposed that what we previously thought of only as particles might have wave properties.
Specifically, he proposed that the wavelength of those waves would be Planck's constant
divided by the momentum of the particle. And he noticed that you can actually put this
back into the Bohr model to interpret the orbits of the Bohr model as kinds of standing
waves. Now, we won't to go any further with that here, because it still does not sort
out the Bohr model correctly in our modern understanding.
But that is a core of truth in this specific idea when we apply it to atomic orbitals.
And we'll get to that later on. Now, this idea of saying that, well, we had waves that
we then decided were particles - that was light and the photon - then, maybe, if you've
got particles, and, specifically, he was thinking of the ones that have mass, like electrons
and so on, then we should think of those as waves.
Well, with the success of this Bohr model and with de Broglie's hypothesis of the wave
nature of the particle with mass, such as an electron-- and, as I said, that's a hypothesis
that also seemed to fit to some degree with Bohr's model-- the stage is now set for a
much more comprehensive mathematical model of some kind. Maybe we're going to manage
to sort all this out, rather than these very ad hoc models that don't seem to have proposals
that come from anywhere in particular. Maybe we can construct something more comprehensive
that really makes sense.
And two models emerged independently at about the same time. So Werner Heisenberg first
proposed a model for quantum mechanics based on matrices in 1925. Actually, at that time,
he didn't really know about matrices. And he unwittingly reinvented matrices and all
their mathematics to do this.
This model looks quite abstract. And matrices, of course, are nowadays very common in a broad
range of scientific and engineering calculations. But in 1925, they were still a very abstract
branch of mathematics and not really known to very many people.
The other model here was Erwin Schroedinger's wave equation, developed in 1925 and published
in 1926. Now, this model, actually, on the face of it looks more concrete. It proposes
actual waves from matter. Though, in fact, it was, perhaps, more abstract than we really
realized at that time. And that's because it's not really all that clear exactly what
those waves are. And what, if anything, they actually mean is one of the subtleties of
quantum mechanics.
Anyway, undoubtedly, one of the major triumphs of Schrodinger's equation is the explanation
of the hydrogen atom with the correct orbitals. Those ones that I showed you, those clouds,
are the result of solving Schrodinger's equation. And that understanding of the hydrogen atom
and the work that follows from it provides our modern understanding of the basics of
atoms and chemical bonding and, thus, of all the major microscopic properties of matter.
When we use quantum mechanics, we may be working with Schrodinger's equation. But, in fact,
we're just as likely to be working with matrices or equivalently writing Schrodinger's equation
in a matrix form. And after some initial controversy between the Heisenberg and Schroedinger approaches,
it was realized, by Schroedinger in fact, that these where actually quite equivalent.
The Heisenberg model and the Schroedinger model were not in contradiction to one another.
They were other ways of looking at the same mathematics. And we will see as we go forward
here now that we use both of these somewhat seamlessly moving between one and the other,
because they are, in fact, the same thing.
The mathematics of quantum mechanics was sorted out over the next several years by Heisenberg
and Schrodinger and a quite remarkable collection of other individuals, including Max Born,
Pascual Jordan, Paul Dirac, and John von Neumann. And since we will be going through both of
these approaches here, including how to move back and forward between them, we will not
go into further details at the moment. But this quantum mechanics based on Heisenberg's
and Schroedinger's formulations will form the basis for much of what we are going to
discuss now. It's at the core of most of the applications of quantum mechanics in engineering
and also for the many basic phenomena in physics and other sciences.