So now, we might believe that the consequences of quantum mechanics are essential for understanding
the ordinary world around us. But is quantum mechanics actually useful? I mean, if we devote
all of our time here to learning it, will it let us make things we could not make before?
Well, one science in which quantum mechanics is obviously essential is chemistry, the science
that enables most of our modern materials. And no one could deny that chemistry is useful.
But supposing even we set chemistry and materials aside and ask a harder question. Do we need
quantum mechanics when we design devices, objects intended to perform some worthwhile
function? After all, we seem to have been quite successful engineering all these devices
of daily life, like washing machines, and eyeglasses, and staplers, and cars, using,
basically, good old fashioned 19th century physics, even if we employ the latest alloys,
or plastics, or paints, or whatever to make them.
Perhaps such microscopic mechanisms can indeed be designed without quantum mechanics. However,
when we want to look at the technology of how we communicate and process information,
technology that is fundamentally transforming our professional lives and our social lives
today, we have simply been forced to move to quantum mechanics. Without quantum mechanics
and quantum theory as a practical technique, we simply would not be able to design the
devices that run our computers and our internet connections.
The mathematical ideas of computing and information had begun to take their modern shape starting
in the 1930s, and then in the 1940s, and 1950s. And incidentally, that same John von Neumann
that I mentioned sorted out much of the mathematics of quantum mechanics, was also the person
to come up with the basic architecture of modern computers. Anyway, by the 1950s, not
only telephones and broadcast television were well-established, the first primitive electronic
computers has been demonstrated.
Though the early technology of these devices was based on electromechanical switches and
vacuum tubes, the transistor and the integrated circuit where the next key breakthroughs that
allowed all this technology to scale up exponentially from then on. So here's a picture of a replica
of the very first transistor. This was made in 1947, the original. And then later on into
the 1960s, we started to have integrated circuits which could combine many, many transistors
at once.
And these, as I said, are the technologies that really allowed the exponential scaling
of all the information that we handle today. They make complex computers, and information
switching, and processing machines available for us. These are all what are called solid
state devices, these transistors, as opposed to vacuum tubes, which have got a lot of vacuum
in them. And they rely very heavily on the quantum mechanical physics of crystalline
materials.
Now, it's true that a well-informed devil's advocate could still argue, though, that the
design of transistors and integrated circuits themselves was initially still an activity
using classical physics. Designers would use the idea of resistance from 19th century electricity,
even if they added the ideas of charged electrons as particles carrying a current. And they
would take the various electrical barriers or potentials that would persuade the electrons
to go one way or another as being classical potentials. But in the end, those really come
from quantum mechanics. However, we could still say that that design is mostly sort
of semi-classical. However, no modern transistor designer can ignore quantum mechanics.
So here is a cross-sectional diagram, a rather simple one, of an actual transistor. In a
transistor like this, current can flow between the source, which you see on the left, and
the drain on the right, through the silicon substrate. And specifically, it can flow through
that channel region near the surface of the substrate, near the top surface there. Now,
applying a voltage to the gate electrode can change the number of charge carriers in the
channel, and therefore, change the amount of current that can flow between the source
and drain. This is the basis of the kinds of transistors we use in modern integrated
circuits.
There has, however, been a growing problem with the design of such transistors. As we
want to make the transistors smaller, we find that we want to reduce the thickness of the
very thin insulating gate oxide layer. That's a layer made probably mostly from silicon
dioxide, or these days, some other oxides are used. For example, we have to make this
very thin, as we go to small, modern transistors. And the difficulty with that is that electrons
can manage to penetrate through that insulator through a purely quantum mechanical process
known as tunneling. There's no classical description of this. It's purely quantum mechanics.
And, as we design modern transistors, at the very least, we have to take that parasitic,
undesired process into account. So here's the tunneling current going through the transistors,
and it's because we are making that gate oxide thinner and thinner here, we're tunneling
from the polysilicon gate electrode through to the channel, and we really don't want that
to happen. Among other things, it gives us an undesired gate leakage current.
So we simply can't, anymore, ignore quantum mechanics when we design the devices. Even
if we think of them in kinds of semi-classical ways, the quantum mechanics comes in, even
if we don't want to. Even then, if we set aside the properties of materials like silicon,
from which transistors are made, we might argue, at least historically, about the importance
of quantum mechanics in the design of the transistors themselves. We could think of
them as being mostly classical devices, as I said, that turn on and off currents, based
on classical electrostatic effects, even if they have these undesired quantum phenomena
like tunneling going on inside them.
However, if we look at some other areas, we have no comparable debate. The technologies
that we use for handling information, and communicating it, and storing it, are undeniably
quantum mechanical. We can't even begin to discuss magnetic storage, or optical communications
without that. And here is a typical little hard drive. We all have these in our computers.
The physics of how we design, and make, and operate these hard drives is intensely quantum
mechanical. The physics of magnetism is very quantum mechanical to start with, and the
modern hard drives actually have got some very advanced quantum mechanics in them.
And this here is an optical fiber. So I've got one here that has got a normal plug on
the end that you would plug into something. But then, as we go down towards the other
end of this fiber, though it's a little small to see, we're seeing a green line here, but
inside that green line is a very thin piece of glass. It's about the thickness of a human
hair, and I can touch it up at the end here. And that is what is used to send information
over the internet, and it's very thin, as I said. And this reel of fiber here has 3.8
kilometers of fiber on it, because it's so thin here, and you can see it's a kind of
glassy thing. It's actually a reel containing all of that optical fiber.
So when we're using these modern technologies, there's simply no way to understand how to
design the devices for these without using quantum mechanics. In the case of the optical
fiber, we're turning on and off these opto-electronic devices that send the ones and zeros as light
pulses down the fiber, for example. And as I said earlier, those kinds of devices are
ones that are intensely quantum mechanical.
Now, with this reel of fiber here, we can understand how the light propagates down the
fiber without leaking out of the side by using classical wave theory. And that classical
wave guide phenomenon that keeps the light within the glass as it goes down has been
understood since the mid- and late-19th century. And as I said, to send the light down here,
we need these opto-electronic devices that send out photons. And all of those opto-electronic
devices are quantum mechanical in at least one way, and possibly many other ways.
They are made from crystalline semiconductor materials, just like transistors, so certainly
quantum mechanics underlies that, as to how that all works. And secondly, as I said, they
send and receive photons, they rely on the photo-electric effect for their basic operation.
And thirdly, actually, most modern semiconductor opto-electronic devices, the ones that convert
between electricity and light, the ones that are used in telecommunications, today employ
very thin layers of material, layers called quantum wells.
And the properties of these extremely thin layers, they may be 10s of atoms thick, depend
exquisitely on just how thick they actually are. And that is an example of a textbook
piece of quantum mechanics, one of the simplest things we can model quantum mechanically,
called the particle in a box problem. And that particular piece of quantum mechanics,
opto-electronic device designers have to use every time they go to design a new laser,
or a new modulator, a new photodetector. They need that quantum mechanics.
So this physics of quantum mechanics allows us to optimize some of the physical processes
we already had in thicker layers of material, and also to create some new mechanisms that
we're only going to see in thin layers. So for such devices, engineering using quantum
mechanics is both essential and very useful. And as I said, when we try to pack more information
onto our magnetic hard drives in a computer, we first have to understand exactly how the
magnetism of materials works.
Magnetism is almost entirely based on a quantum mechanical attribute called spin, and that
phenomenon has no real classical analog. The sensors that read the information off the
disk drives in our computers today are often also based on very sophisticated structures
with multiple thin layers, and those are designed completely with quantum mechanics. Quantum
mechanics is, then, a subject increasingly necessary for engineering devices, especially
as we make them smaller and smaller, or as we exploit quantum mechanical properties and
processes that only exist because we've made such small structures. And the examples I
gave here are only a few from a very broad and growing field that could be called nanotechnology.
Nanotechnology exploits our expanding abilities to make very small structures or patterns,
and the benefits of nanotechnology come from the new properties that appear at these very
small scales. We get most of these new properties from quantum mechanical effects of one kind
or another. Quantum mechanics is, therefore, essential for nanotechnology.