Many scientists at the start of the story of quantum mechanics were very resistant to
these new ideas. And they have very good reasons for resisting them. These ideas seemed to
offer an explanation for observable phenomena, and there were no other good explanations.
But they disagreed with the core ways we thought about the world. And as I said, it's important
to understand that even many of the scientists involved really did not want the world to
have to be described this way. Including, for example Max Planck.
And Max Planck was initially very resistant to the ideas of quantum mechanics, even though
he was the person who started it. Now, as the theory developed, as a good scientist
he eventually did come to accept it, but with great reluctance. And I expect we all know
of many people who only believe what they want to believe. And there's possibly a moral
lesson here.
But the reluctance in the case of quantum mechanics to believing it is extremely understandable.
The problem was not only that it struck at our whole way of thinking about the world.
If this quantum theory was correct, it would mean we would have to completely rewrite physics.
And any new scientific theory has got a very high hill to climb. It has to give exactly
the same answers as the old theories everywhere those old theories or previous models worked.
And yet, it also has to successfully describe the phenomena that we couldn't understand
before.
Now, the prior theories of mechanics, like Newton's laws, work very well in a broad range
of situations. Our models for light similarly were quite deep. And it achieved a remarkable
unification of electricity and magnetism. Maxwell's equations from the 19th century
are one of the major triumphs of 19th century physics.
So how could we, in some sense, possibly throw away all these models, which also do work
very well in certain domains and scales? How could we possibly come up with a new basis
for all of these that was fundamentally different, but nonetheless gave the same answers everywhere
they did. That requirement that any new quantum mechanical theory should also give results
that correspond in these appropriate domains with the classical results is called a correspondence
principle, by the way.
Of course, it was also true as we looked more deeply at these various phenomena, and light,
and atoms, that there simply was no way we could explain them with our classical view.
And those classical models would themselves lead to contradictions with observed reality.
For example, as we discussed, when we would try to make a model of the atom, with the
electrons circling around some charged nucleus-- like a satellite in orbit round the earth--
we meet major inconsistencies. Existing mechanics and electromagnetic theories, I said, would
predict that any such orbiting electron would constantly be emitting light. But atoms, for
example, in their ground states simply do not do that.
The challenge for quantum mechanics was not an easy one. To resolve these problems of
light and the structure of matter, we actually had to tear down much of our view of the way
the world works to a degree never seen since the introduction of natural philosophy and
the modern scientific method in the Renaissance. Scientists were simply forced to construct
a completely new set of principles for the physical world. These were and still are in
many cases completely bizarre. And they are certainly very different from what our intuition,
or what we might call our common sense, says that they should be.
And many of these principles simply have no analogs in our normal view of reality. But
we're forced to do this. If we do not do this, we actually cannot understand our world. And
we will prevent the development of large areas of engineering that can create very powerful
and useful technologies. We mentioned previously one of the bizarre
aspects of quantum mechanics. The process of tunneling allows particles to penetrate
barriers that are simply classically too high for them to overcome. This process is, however,
actually nothing like the idea of digging a tunnel. There's no spade here. There's no
hole that we dig. It's just not what's going on.
We're confronting here the common difficulty in quantum mechanics of finding words and
analogies from everyday experience to describe quantum mechanical ideas. And we will often
fail to come up with good words or good descriptions from what we see around us in our classical
world as we try to explain quantum mechanics. It's not that we don't understand it. We just
don't have the words to describe the things that we're talking about.
There are many other surprising aspects of quantum mechanics. And as we start to learn
quantum mechanics, we are confused when told, as we often will be, that some questions simply
does not have an answer.
For example, we might think it perfectly reasonable to ask the question, as scientists did for
several centuries, of whether light is composed of particles or waves. It would seem, according
to our common sense, that it would have to be one or the other. But in fact, if we insist
on this either/or answer, that is that light must be definitely either a particle or a
wave, than there actually is no answer to that question. The only answer we can give
to it is that both of these, which is the idea of wave-particle duality, are simultaneously
true.
Another example is we might think it perfectly reasonable to ask, what are the position and
the momentum, or more loosely the speed, of some particle, such as an electron. Quantum
mechanics will enigmatically reply to us that there is actually no answer to that question.
We can know one or the other precisely, but not both at once. This particular enigma is
an example of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
Indeed, though it may seem bizarre, in the cases of both wave-particle duality and Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle, in the quantum mechanical view of the world, there is no contradiction
involved in either of these concepts. They are natural phenomena that lead to no confusions
in quantum mechanics, at least if we separate them off from another and much more genuine
difficulty called the measurement problem, to which we will return later.
One of our natural human desires is to find causes and meanings in the things that we
see round about us. These are part of the way that we construct models of reality that
enable us to function efficiently as human beings. So as you learn quantum mechanics,
you are likely to keep wanting to know the meaning of various terms and concepts as you
work to construct your revised models of how things work.
It's common and natural, therefore, for the student to ask what something means. However,
I can warn you know that this is going to be quite frustrating at first. These interactions
often take the following form.
The student asks about the meaning of something in quantum mechanics, such as the uncertainty
principle or the wave function or some other topic. The professor or instructor replies
with the question, well, what was it you wanted to measure? If you can tell me what you wanted
to measure, we can figure out how to calculate that with quantum mechanics. And the student
waits in vain for the professor to answer the question about what something means.
This is also-- and this is quite serious, incidentally-- called the shut up and calculate
approach. Despite this, it is a rather important as a student to at least try to frame these
questions. Without to some extent fighting quantum mechanics and its ideas, you will
never actually understand them properly.
The more serious philosophical version of this approach is to assert that things that
don't have meaning in science are the things you can't measure. Or if you can't measure
them, you don't have meaning. This philosophical approach of dealing only with questions that
can be answered by measurement or that are purely logical questions within some formal
system of logic, that approach is what is called logical positivism. We regard everything
else as meaningless. If you can't measure it in the real physical world, it's meaningless.
And it is the most common approach taken in dealing with quantum mechanics, at least at
the elementary philosophical level. And by allowing university professors to dismiss
most student questions themselves as meaningless, it saves a lot of time in teaching the subject.
Now one very substantial difficulty with this philosophical approach is that it is not clear
in quantum mechanics what measurement actually is. Indeed, it can even be proved in at least
one interpretation of quantum mechanics that you can't actually make a measurement in quantum
mechanics. This whole issue is referred to as the measurement problem in quantum mechanics.
And it is important to understand that the measurement problem is, in some people's opinion,
really not satisfactorily resolved.
You need to know that, because otherwise you may just think that somehow it is just that
you are not smart enough to understand it. And that might cause you to give up. Actually,
it is not clear if anyone is smart enough to understand it, so join the club. At least
don't worry that somehow the problem is with you. The problem is not with you. This is
a real and arguably unresolved problem in quantum mechanics.
If, at this point, you're raising an objection that there's an inconsistency in saying that
quantum mechanics will only answer questions about things we can measure but quantum mechanics
cannot actually explain the process of measurement, you're quite justified in raising that objection.
Now what was it you wanted to measure? According to quantum mechanics an object may
exist in a superposition state in which it is, for example, neither definitively on the
left in that case nor on the right. Such superposition states are not at all unusual. In fact, they
occur all the time for electrons and any atom or molecule. In quantum mechanics, anything
that is moving or changing in time is certainly in a superposition state. And the idea of
superposition is actually already well known in classical physics. So many kinds of waves
show what is called linear superposition, with light and radio waves being good examples
in most practical situations.
Waves can pass right through one another, and there's no problem with waves in thinking
of the state of the surface of the sea as being one in which there's a superposition
of waves going in different directions. What we were not expecting was that matter could
be thought of in this way. Nonetheless, it appears that at least in the atomic level,
this idea of superposition certainly works.
One kind of superposition that might happen in some systems might be that the particle
as I said could be in a superposition of being on the left and on the right. This can happen
in something like an ammonia molecule, for example, in which the nitrogen atom in that
structure could either be on the left, or it could be on the right to the structure.
Or quantum mechanically, it can actually be in a superposition of the two.
Now, though a particle might be in a superposition state, when we try to measure which state
or position it is in, we always find the object is in some specific position, either, for
example, definitely on the left or definitely on the right. And this almost mystical phenomenon
is known as the collapse of the wave function. We might find that to be a bizarre idea, but
one that for something really tiny like an electron or an ammonia molecule, we could
perhaps accept.
But Schroedinger thought about this, and he proposed that we think not about an electron,
but instead about his cat. He imagines that his favorite cat is sealed in a box, and inside
the box, there is some lethal mechanism. It might be a bomb or a vile of poisonous gas.
And that might be triggered, for example, as a result of a radioactive decay. That's
an apparently unpredictable quantum mechanical event involving only a single atomic nucleus.
That single atomic nucleus could quantum mechanically be in a superposition state of having decayed
radioactively and not having decayed. And in the mathematics we set up for quantum mechanics,
we can view the entire system of the nucleus and the cat as being in such a superposition
state, a superposition of the nucleus not decayed and the cat alive and the nucleus
decayed and the cat dead.
Now, before we open the box to check on it, is the cat alive, dead, or as quantum mechanics
might seem to suggest, in some superposition of the two? Now, our experience tells us that
once we open the box and look at the cat, we are going to see that it is either alive
or dead, not in some superposition. So how do we get from that quantum mechanical superposition
to what we see in our experience?
This is actually another example of the measurement problem, and as physicists look at various
possible ways of interpreting quantum mechanics, they often discuss this thought experiment.
Hopefully, it remains a thought experiment and no one actually does it. For example,
Schroedinger himself seems to have regarded this whole idea of his cat and the box and
the superposition, as showing the absurdity of what was called and is still called the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, which seems to say that perhaps reality as
we see it is actually created by the process of measurement. So again, it's not clear what
the process is.
Now, just thinking about a cat being in a superposition of being alive and dead, it
seems absurd. And we cannot really check something as complicated as that. We don't know how
to set up an experiment to test such quantum mechanical notions with really microscopic
objects. So people are trying to look at the idea of superposition in progressively larger
objects, but they're still pretty small.
One difficulty is that in trying to repeat such an experiment, we really can't set up
exactly the same starting state for something as complex as a cat. So we're really not sure
that the experiment is truly repeatable and that the randomness we might appear to see
in the results might just arguably be a result of the practical randomness of our different
starting points in different attempts to run these experiments.
Physicist disagree about the resolution of this difficulty. It is an example of a core
problem in quantum mechanics. As I said, this process of measurement with its mysterious
collapse of the wave function at least in one view, cannot be explained by quantum mechanics.
The proposed solutions to this measurement problem can be extremely bizarre.
For example, in the many worlds hypothesis, the world is supposed to continually split
into multiple realities, one for each possible outcome of each possible measurement. Now,
maybe that's true, maybe it isn't. But unfortunately, as we've seen in quantum mechanics, whether
or not something is bizarre is not a good guide as to whether or not it is true.
Another important discussion centers around whether quantum mechanics is complete. When
we measure a quantum mechanical system, there is at least, in practice, some randomness
in the result. If for example, we try to measure the position of an electron and an atom, we
would keep getting different results when we tried to repeat the experiment. Or if we
measured how long it took a radioactive nucleus like the one in our Schrodinger's cat box,
how long it took that to decay, we would get different numbers each time.
Quantum mechanics would correctly predict the average position we would measure for
the electron and the average decay time of the nucleus. But it would not tell us a specific
position or time yielded by any particular measurement.
We are, of course, quite used to randomness in our ordinary classical world. We might
play the lottery and perhaps a lottery is decided by which numbered ball appears at
the output of some machine. Often these machines are constructed with various different balls
all bouncing around inside the machine, maybe driven by some air blower. And that process
is sufficiently complicated that in practice none of us can predict which ball will emerge.
And all of us with our different tickets for the lottery will have equal chance.
But we do tend to believe classically that if we knew the initial positions and velocities
of all the air molecules and balls in the machine, we could in principle even if not
in practice predict which ball would emerge. Those variables are in practice hidden from
us - the precise positions of every molecule and atom and the velocities of them. But in
a classical view of the world, we believe they exist.
So behind the apparent randomness of quantum mechanics then, are there similarly some hidden
variables? Could we actually predict outcomes precisely if we knew what those hidden variables
were? Is the apparent randomness of quantum mechanics just because of our lack of understanding
of some deeper theory and its starting conditions, some complete theory that would supersede
the quantum mechanics that we currently know?
Einstein believed that indeed, quantum mechanics was not complete. That there had to be some
hidden variables. That once we understood what they are in this deeper theory we would
resolve quantum mechanics and remove its apparent randomness. Relatively recent work centered
around a set of relations called Bell's inequalities shows rather surprisingly that there are no
such hidden variables or at least not what we call local ones that propagate along with
the particles. And that despite its apparent absurdities, quantum mechanics may well be
a complete theory in this sense.
It also appears even more strangely that quantum mechanics is non-local. Now, what do I mean
by that? Two particles can be what's called entangled-- which is actually a concept made
up by Schroedinger in discussing all this-- they can be entangled quantum mechanically
to such a degree that measuring one of them can apparently instantaneously change the
state of the other no matter how far away it is.
Now, whether your regard this as a cause and effect is actually not at all clear but there
still is an aspect about this that seems to happen as if there were cause and effect.
It is certainly the case that it's not possible to use this phenomenon to communicate information
faster than the velocity of light.
This non-locality is very odd, and it's often known through the original, what is called
the EPR, thought experiment or paradox that was proposed by Einstein and his colleagues
Podolsky and Rosen. And incidentally, it was apparently a discussion of this paper between
Einstein and Schrodinger that led to Schrodinger's discussion of his cat and as I said, also
his introduction of the concept of these entangled states.
So this is a very strange idea, one that we are as scientists still grappling with, this
idea of non-locality. But it seems that maybe quantum mechanics is complete as we stated
it, and maybe there are none of these hidden variables, which leaves us with some very
bizarre conclusions. Despite all its absurdities and contradictions
of common sense and despite the initial disbelief and astonishment of each new generation of
scientists, of students, about how quantum mechanics works, as far as we know it is never
wrong. We have made no experimental measurement that is known to contradict quantum mechanics
and there have been many very exacting experiments.
Quantum mechanics is both stunningly radical and remarkably right. It is really an astonishing
intellectual achievement.
The story of quantum mechanics itself is very far from over. We are still trying to understand
exactly what are all the elementary particles and just what the implications of such theories
are for the nature of the universe. Elementary particle theory we will not get into in this
course because it requires relativistic approaches and we will leave those for later and we will
not make them part of this discussion.
However, many researchers are working on the possibilities of using some of the stranger
ideas in quantum mechanics for applications in handling information transmission. One
example would send messages whose secrecy was protected by the laws of quantum physics,
quantum mechanics, not just by the practical difficulty of cracking classical codes. Another
example is the field of quantum computing in which quantum mechanics might allow us
to solve problems that would be too hard ever to be solved by any conventional machine.
Now, at this point, you may be feeling overwhelmed by all these strange ideas and be about to
give up in despair. How can anyone ever understand such a bizarre theory? And if you can't understand
it, how can you even think about using it?
Here is the good news. Whether we think we understand quantum mechanics, and whether
there is yet more to discover about how it works, quantum mechanics is actually surprisingly
straightforward to use. The rules and the approaches for using quantum mechanics in
a broad range of practical problems and engineering designs are relatively straightforward.
We use the same mathematical techniques that most engineering and science students will
already have mastered to deal with the classical world. And because of a particular elegance
in the mathematics of quantum mechanics, namely, that it is based entirely on linear algebra,
quantum mechanical calculations can actually be easier than those in many other fields.
The main difficulty that the beginning student has with quantum mechanics lies in knowing
which of our classical notions of the world have to be discarded, and what new notions
we have to use to replace them. Indeed, it is this aspect that makes it very difficult
to teach yourself quantum mechanics.
Because such basic conceptual shifts are required, you simply can't pick up quantum mechanics
just from encountering bits and pieces of it as techniques here and there. You really
need to take a course that forces you through a fairly complete development of the subject's
concepts.
As you do this, you should expect to spend some time in disbelief and conflict with what
is being asserted to you in quantum mechanics. That is entirely normal. In fact, a good fight
with those propositions is probably psychologically necessary if you're ever get on top of the
subject. Incidentally, I should say that the associated teaching technique of breaking
down the students' beliefs and replacing them with the professor's "correct" answers has
a lot in common with brainwashing.
And, as we mentioned above, there is a key point that simplifies all the absurdities
and apparent contradictions. Provided we only ask questions about quantities that can be
measured, there are no remaining physical problems that need worry us-- philosophical
problems. At least, none that would prevent us from calculating anything we could measure.
As we use quantum mechanical principles in tangible everyday applications, such as electronic
or optical devices and systems, the apparently bizarre aspects of quantum mechanics simply
become commonplace and routine. You may soon stop worrying about quantum mechanical tunneling
and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. Perhaps in the foreseeable future, such a routine
comprehension and acceptance might also extend to concepts such as non-locality and entanglement
as we start using those more in practical situations, for example, in sending secure
information.
For any of us, understanding quantum mechanics marks a qualitative change in our view of
how the world actually works. That understanding gives us the opportunity to apply this knowledge
in ways that others cannot begin to comprehend. Whether your goal is basic understanding or
practical exploitation, learning quantum mechanics is, in my opinion, at least, certainly one
of the most fascinating things you can do with your brain.